I feel a sweet sadness writing my 36th and last letter to shareholders as CEO. I
will miss being a key person in the day-to-day work of Progressive's becoming a
greater company. This valedictory letter covers the Company's 2000 results and
prospects. It is written in the context of my thoughts about the reasons
Progressive has produced extraordinary results for more than three decades and
why pursuing the same fundamentals will support Progressive continuing to
perform excellently in the process of becoming United States consumers' #1
choice for auto insurance.
The bedrock of Progressive's success is its Core Values, its Vision of
reducing the human trauma and economic costs of auto accidents and the
challenging Financial Objectives against which we evaluate performance. The
Vision, Values and Objectives provide the clarity that lets excellent people
perform well. The Vision affirms our benefit to society and drives our
single-minded focus on U.S. auto insurance buyers. The Values guide behavior.
The demanding Objectives attract the special people who enjoy working hard,
performing well, being rewarded competitively and growing constantly.
INSURANCE OPERATIONS
Regrettably, my last year as CEO produced unacceptable results. The
2000 combined ratio missed Progressive's four percent underwriting profit
objective by 8.4 points. This goal permeates our culture and its achievement is
required for senior operating managers to earn target bonuses. We also missed
our goal of growing premium volume at 15 percentage points greater than the rate
of inflation. Rate increases in late 1999 and throughout 2000 made Progressive
less competitive, resulting in one percent premium volume growth. This letter
identifies the causes of 2000's disappointing performance and what was
accomplished during 2000 so that 2001 results can be better.
I am proud of and comfortable with how I was succeeded. After 35 years
as CEO, passing age 65, being partially disabled and enjoying my good life
outside Progressive, I was ready to shed the furious pace, complex
responsibilities and agonizing people decisions required of a great CEO. Led by
me, the Board conducted a thoughtful, thorough and deliberate three-year process
that resulted in Glenn Renwick officially becoming CEO of The Progressive
Corporation on January 1, 2001. Glenn has broad, successful experience in most
areas of Progressive's operations. He was ready when he effectively became CEO
at the start of 2000 and has flourished through 2000's "baptism in the fire." I
remain involved as "coach and cheerleader," am in close touch with Glenn and
other managers, and am working to be an effective Chairman of an effective Board
of Directors.
Although each year's results are very important, the vagaries of
capital flows, natural disasters, competitive pressures and accounting estimates
make it more reasonable to evaluate achievement over consecutive five-year
periods. For the five years ending December 31, 2000, our average underwriting
profit margin was 3.2 percent and our average annual growth rate was 16 percent.
In 1999, Progressive became the #4 U.S. private passenger auto insurer based on
volume, by understanding the fundamentals and having the will and discipline to
stick with them. Our competition has changed as we have grown, and is tougher
now than ever. I believe that following these proven concepts may lead to
meeting our targets over the next five years.
8
Progressive knows about auto insurance cyclicality. After periods of
okay profit margins, competitors begin to price more for market share than for
underwriting profit. This starts a downward cycle, which often is amplified by
costs escalating faster than expected, and/or regulators inhibiting rate
increases, and/or high interest rates prompting careless underwriting, and/or
mistakes in rate making. Progressive does not intentionally price for market
share, and reacts fast when the other factors come into play. That is why we
grow less during unprofitable parts of the cycle, like during 2000.
Progressive people's creativity, a rapidly changing business milieu and
the value we attribute to continuous improvement drives constant innovation and
change, not always in the right direction. I attribute 2000's results less to
the cycle than to sub-optimal organizational and tactical decisions led or made
by me prior to 2000. As CEO-Insurance Operations during 2000, Glenn Renwick
accomplished an enormous amount to remedy these problems, to develop new
capabilities and to ready Progressive for a positive surge. The changes
conceived by Glenn and his leadership team greatly improve Progressive's future
prospects. Fast, decisive actions were required when profit margins deteriorated
in late 1999 and Glenn led us to take them!
Progressive believes in being unusually open and values people who look
for and disclose problems, and seek help to get them fixed. This constant search
for shortfall, combined with measuring almost everything, keeps us working on
problems, many of which were identified in my 1999 shareholders' letter. We
described the same issues in more detail in early 2000, at the first of what we
plan to be annual March meetings with security analysts and investors. I am
pleased to report the progress we have made against each of those changes.
9
Progressive's alternative to making a proper underwriting profit is not to do
business. Progressive's people understand that it is absolutely necessary always
to charge enough to earn our target returns and to raise rates immediately when
experience suggests the need. Ratemaking is subject to error. Our rates became
inadequate due to unanticipated increases in personal injury protection and
physical damage claim costs, because we changed profit objectives, and because
claim handling deteriorated.
In 2000, we returned to our historical 4 percent annual profit
objective, increased rates fast, began improving claim handling and studied how
better to anticipate loss trend changes. Increasing rates before competitors do
slows growth and causes our competitors to grow faster. While not growing, we
fix the processing problems that always arise during previous periods of fast
growth and change. Some competitors grow faster while both their underwriting
results and customer service deteriorate. Then competitors finally raise rates
and restrict acceptances to stem their losses. When this has happened, because
Progressive's rates had been adequate and our operations were running smoothly,
we grew, usually quite profitably. We will soon learn whether this long-time
dynamic still operates.
In 1998, we changed the basis for employee Gainsharing from 4 percent
annual profit margin to a 4 percent profit margin over the life of the policy.
This was based on an assumption, which turned out to be wrong, that we could
accurately calculate the future profits to be realized on policies written
currently. Upon understanding our mistake, we reverted to the annual profit
standard for 2000 and beyond. The Gainsharing payout declined from $55.6 million
for 1999 to $8.3 million for 2000. We made mistakes in product design that were
mostly corrected. In 1999, 35 percent of our policies were written for a
semiannual term. Now 80 percent of policies are being written for a six-month
term, which speeds by six months the effect of rate changes.
Progressive regularly reorganizes to adapt to new circumstances, which energizes
and challenges its people. Through the 1980s and 1990s, we managed growth by a
series of subdivisions into smaller geographic units each managed by a General
Manager (GM) who was responsible for profit and growth in his/her area. By 1999,
we had subdivided into 39 such units, with the new GMs' first objective being to
apply their creativity and energy to improve claim service and lower claim costs
in their communities -- yet many absorbed themselves in marketing activities.
That structure dissipated pricing talent and ineffectively matched corporate
pricing strategy to local market and regulatory conditions. In April 2000, Glenn
reorganized again -- this time functionally, with separate managers and
objectives for marketing agent-produced business and telephone/Internet-related
business.
Progressive's people are the reason for Progressive's superior
performance and exciting prospects. Retaining people was difficult in 2000, as
our folks were faced with disappointing results, minimal or no Gainsharing and a
vibrant employment market. Employee turnover predictably escalated from 18.4
percent in 1999 to 22.4 percent in 2000. Some of the increase was due to
Company-initiated departures after the claim diagnostic review and the
reorganization.
Progressive's leaders understand profoundly that claim service is the
principal service we deliver. The reorganization made Claims a separate
department, with the head of Claims reporting to Glenn. The claims head and a
team of 15 people, six of whom are regional General Managers covering the U.S.,
implement strategies they develop as a team. These 16 folks have an average of
16 years of Progressive experience, mostly in claims, with some great successes
as GMs. This organization eliminates roadblocks to decision making and standard
setting.
10
The new claim management team's first step was self-critically to examine our
own claim handling from the customers' viewpoint. We learned that concentrating
on delivering fast claim service had led us to divide tasks and involve too many
people in each claim, diminishing our customers' experience and increasing total
cost. Speed is but one essential factor in a well-handled claim. Future customer
interactions will be more personal and caring with corresponding improvements in
speed of final resolution and payment accuracy. Our claim handlers will be more
helpers and less investigators/negotiators.
A number of valuable changes are already in place as a byproduct of
this claim review, including a new claim file-by-claim file quality calibration
process that lets us better evaluate individual claim handlers and overall claim
handling. We moved experienced claim managers from largely administrative duties
to working with their people on day-to-day file handling. We are testing an
array of techniques to bring us closer yet to our customers and will further
differentiate our claim service so that it becomes an even more recognized and
important part of our continuously developing brand.
Concern that loss reserves might have become deficient was another 2000
problem. Achieving "accurate" reserves is like balancing a scale where what's
being weighed continuously changes and exact balance (exactly accurate reserves)
is elusive and accuracy is ephemeral. Progressive's reserving philosophy is
never to be inadequate. Historically, we set reserves near the high end of the
reasonable range of reserves to ensure we didn't slip below balance. Our
attempts through the '90s to reduce reserve redundancy put us disconcertingly
close to or even under balance and shook manager confidence. In 2000, we applied
more energy to studying reserves and we increased them. We will soon publish the
first detailed analysis of our own loss reserves since 1995, in order to help
those who follow Progressive to better understand and critique our thinking,
process and detailed reserve segments.
Other important accomplishments resulted from our constant effort to improve.
Glenn and his team focused early on expense management, achieving reductions for
the Agency group whose expenses were down to 18.8 percent of premiums earned
from 20.7 percent last year. This was due in part to an increase in percentage
of renewals, the reduced Gainsharing payout and no longer charging brand
advertising to the Agency business. The Direct business expense ratio was
reduced to 29.6 percent from 38.5 percent by more expertly buying advertising
and an increase in the percentage of renewal policies. We changed focus from
brand building and internal process orientation to making it easier and more
comfortable for customers to be with us. As part of a concerted 2001 effort to
increase renewal persistency, Glenn articulated a standard for handling every
aspect of every customer experience -- "Virtually Perfect." We will move
inexorably toward that standard.
Progressive's long-time intense focus on changing U.S. auto insurance
to make it easier and less costly for consumers led us to Immediate Response(R)
claims service, 24/7 in-person delivery of all Progressive services, free
comparative rates, distributing all ways consumers want to buy, the first
Internet "buy button" and more. Our open, flexible, creative approach to the
business continued in 2000 and more firsts, including making progressive.com the
first auto insurance site available on Web-enabled cellular phones, promising
tests of new ways to handle physical damage losses and confidence-building
progress in our Internet-related business. We received the Gomez award for the
No. 1 online insurance carrier for the last three consecutive quarters in 2000
and continued volume increases causing Internet business to be 15 percent of
Direct business net premiums written, up from 7 percent in 1999, and to be 3
percent of total Company volume, up from 1 percent in 1999.
11
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT AND INVESTING
Although investment returns are an important part of our operations, any premium
in Progressive's stock price depends on continuing profitable growth in the auto
insurance business. This is the reason previous shareholder letters have dealt
more with operations than with capital and investing. This will be my first and
final discourse on why Progressive manages capital and invests as it does.
Our primary objective of capital and investment management is always to
have sufficient capital to support all the insurance we can profitably
underwrite. Other objectives include financing growth internally and maintaining
a senior debt rating of at least A. The fundamental drivers are the same as in
operations -- Core Values, high standards and excellent people paid well for
achieving challenging objectives. Capital and investment management objectives,
processes and controls have evolved based on experience garnered from over 35
years of trying hard to do both well. Managing these functions requires the
ability to attract the best people, to decide what to do about conflicting
objectives, to communicate unfamiliar and complex ideas, and to make major
decisions quickly.
CAPITAL MANAGEMENT Capital Management Policy is established by the CEO, CFO and
Chairman. By producing a proper underwriting profit, growing premium volume at
the targeted rate and managing capital aggressively but prudently, we have
posted a return on equity that met our goal of exceeding the inflation rate by
15 percentage points in 18 of the past 25 years.
Auto insurance customers pay in advance so a profitable, growing
company could theoretically operate with no capital, by paying yesterday's bills
with today's premium receipts. Because insurance companies hold customers' money
against a promise to deliver future service and indemnity and are not always
profitable, sensible regulation requires companies to have "adequate" capital,
generally defined by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC).
Our desire to fall within NAIC parameters establishes Progressive's minimum
capital level.
12
We want to have more than the minimum capital to support excellent
debt, claim paying and A.M. Best ratings, to fund dramatic growth if it comes,
to deal with catastrophic losses and unforeseen surprises, and to be able to
take advantage of unforeseen opportunities. Being conservative assures capital
adequacy. The questions are how much capital is required for these purposes, how
much excess do we have and what do we do about it?
Progressive is special because our objectives are tough to achieve,
particularly all of them every year. We discipline our use of capital by
requiring ourselves to produce an excellent return on it. To become U.S.
consumers' #1 choice for auto insurance, we expect to expand market share and
volume for the foreseeable future, in part because we are not distracted by any
other business and in part because we will continue to spend millions each year
for the systems, training and facilities required to achieve and manage such
growth. These "investments" in business capacity are funded from current
operations, not from capital. Currently, we see no attractive alternatives,
including acquisition, to deploy excess capital.
Progressive's 2000 return on equity was 1.7 percent, compared to 10.9
percent in 1999 and 16.7 percent under the objective, because we produced too
little profit on too much capital. We are working hard on addressing the "too
little profit" issue. Repurchasing our shares is our strong preference for
reducing capital. In 2000, we repurchased 272,500 shares at an average price of
$58.09, compared to no open market purchases in 1999. In 2001, we will
repurchase shares when our capital position, view of the future and the stock's
price make it attractive to do so. In December, we paid off $300 million of 10
percent and 10.125 percent maturing debt. At December 31, our ratio of debt to
total debt plus equity was 20.7 percent.
13
INVESTING Progressive's investment objectives, beyond having sufficient
capital, include maximizing total investment return, managing to predetermined
risk levels and maintaining adequate liquidity. Although responsible for
managing Progressive's assets since they were less than $10 million, I
concentrated on insurance operations and didn't develop the skills to be a
competent, confident buyer and seller of financial assets. Instead, we hired
investment specialists, either employees or fee/incentive-paid outside managers,
whose recommendations and reasoning were debated by a committee of specialized
"experts," directors and senior managers who spent too much time coming to
sub-optimal consensus decisions.
The lessons we learned from this experience follow and are implicit in
how we manage investing today.
-        Excellent investment professionals are unusually intelligent,
articulate, confident and persuasive. We organize and operate in ways
that attract people with those qualities.
-        Our way is but one of many "right ways" to invest. We stay open to
considering new and different approaches.
-        Progressive's culture requires carefully researched and well-
rationalized investing that is understood by interested operating
people. Intuitive esoteric investing is not possible for us.
-        Asset allocation is the biggest investment decision. We seek and
consider input from senior managers and Directors before making it.
-        Occasionally, extraordinary investors produce consistently superior
results. These investors usually invest mostly for themselves, and the
results are difficult, if not impossible, to replicate. We take big
risks in our operating business, but not in our investment business.
Our objective is to achieve market returns on the high-grade, short
duration, fixed-income debt securities that comprise 85% of our assets
as well as on equities and other investments.
-        Business, investing and capital strategies are inextricable, mutually
informing and driven by change. We review, re-evaluate and revise these
strategies as circumstances dictate.
-        Regulation, risk appetite and operating need make fixed-income
securities our major investment vehicle. Most of Progressive's
investment time and talent is devoted to such instruments.
-        Asset values seem to plummet at the least comfortable times. We don't
assume different asset classes will necessarily move in different
directions, and we carefully consider "worst case" outcomes.
-        Progressive is not great at buying, nor interested in operating,
businesses that do not directly support its strategy.
The Board's investment committee approves asset allocation ranges,
investment objectives, risk parameters and an evolving list of investing
constraints. Progressive employs portfolio managers who manage the fixed-income
securities in a process that prompts them to move assets from weakening to
strengthening bond categories. For the equity securities, 57.6 percent are
managed internally, with the remainder primarily indexed to the Russell 3000 by
an outside manager.
In 2000, Progressive earned an 8.6 percent total return on its
portfolio. The fixed-income return was 11.1 percent for the year. We benefited
from a timely lengthening of duration in mid-year. At December 31, our
fixed-income portfolio duration was 3.5 years and our average credit quality was
AA-. In 2000, the internally managed equity return was 1.1 percent, in line with
results achieved by value oriented active equity managers. All other risk
assets, which include high yield and distressed debt, private equities and
warrants, and mezzanine investments, comprise 2 percent of total invested assets
and had a total return of negative 7.8 percent.
14
REVELATION AND THANKS
My perspective results from 35 years of on-the-job CEO training at Progressive,
throughout which I felt unsure and unqualified to deal with the constant,
unpredictable issues raised by continuous fast growth and change. I relied on
trial and error and often was wrong. We prospered because I searched for,
acknowledged and fixed (or ended) mistakes, and worked hard to nurture a few
good decisions into profitable growth. Progressive benefits from a culture that
makes acknowledging one's own shortfall a positive learning experience.
Thanks to every person who ever contributed energy and intelligence to
Progressive. Neither the Company nor I would be where we are without you. Thanks
to the 19,490 men and women who will take Progressive into 2001 and beyond for
your contributions in 2000. We deeply appreciate the nearly 8 million customers
we are privileged to serve. Thanks for your business. Thanks to the agents in
the more than 30,000 Independent Insurance Agencies who did business with
Progressive in 2000. Thanks to our shareholders for their confidence.
I honor the people who founded Progressive and got it started -- my
dad, Joe Lewis, founder and first CEO; Jack Green, co-founder and second CEO; my
grandmother, Irma Rosenfeld who put up the first capital; my mom, Helen
Rosenfeld Lewis Bialosky, who, in 1965, financed the two of us when we acquired
control of Progressive and my brother, Dan Lewis, who has served superbly in a
variety of senior Progressive roles over the past 14 years.
Progressive's pace and aspirations demand boundless energy, commitment
and hard work. In my new role, I have the unique opportunity to continue to
influence Progressive as it approaches a future which I believe will be even
greater than its illustrious past. This is my last letter as CEO, but it's not
good-bye. Take care of yourselves. Be well and happy.
Joy Love and Peace
/s/ Peter B. Lewis
Peter B. Lewis
Chairman of the Board
15