15
We entered 2004 with tremendous momentum and a clear
understanding of our operational initiatives. We were acutely
aware that market conditions were changing quickly and
that the next chapter in our story would involve somewhat
slower growth, but, if played well, would be an opportunity
for strong margins and meaningful execution on our strate-
gic “To Do List.” Charley, Frances, Ivan and Jeanne all tried
to slow our momentum during the year, but to little avail;
2004 was a year in which Progressive achieved impressive
results and, more importantly, impressive advances on our
strategic agenda and future positioning.
We grew net premiums written about $1.5 billion, or 12%.
On an absolute basis, this was considerably more modest
than in recent years, but on a relative basis met our expec-
tation of several times the industry average. Net income
increased 31% over last year, driven by exceptional under-
writing profitability, and was more than acceptable at a
record $1.65 billion, or $7.63 per share.
16
Progressive: Relative Frequency
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Jan
Dec
I
,
s
F
P
0
0
0
1
/
s
e
r
u
t
a
e
F
w
e
N
Market Conditions
In summarizing 2003, I reported that the auto insurance industry produced a combined ratio under 100% for
just the second time in 25 years. We estimate 2004 will not only produce back-to-back profitability, but
perhaps the lowest industry-wide combined ratio in history. Current market conditions seem to be setting up a
likely three-peat in 2005. With proﬁtability well in hand for most competitors, and continuing declines in auto-
mobile accident frequency, there was little in the way of rate pressure for the average consumer.(On a personal
note, my Progressive policy premium has remained level for the two most recent renewals.)The predictable
outcome was signiﬁcantly less consumer shopping.
These conditions tested our traditional understanding about elasticity of demand under rate reduction
scenarios. In fact, it was very clear that while some rate reductions were in order, other potential reductions
would produce little change in new business volume and simply reduce margins. Many companies were chas-
ing fewer interested consumers. These conditions, in concert with favorable operating margins, caused us to
temporarily reassess our goal of growing as fast as possible constrained only by our 96 combined ratio and the
ability to provide high-quality service. Instead, we pursued a strategy of maintaining relatively robust margins
without signiﬁcantly impairing growth. Our product managers chose to be selective in rate changes, favoring
rate stability, while advancing product design, brand and technology initiatives.
While these market conditions and profitability levels are unusual, and perhaps transitional, they offer
opportunities for us to improve our understanding and calibration of market responses to varying rate stimuli.
We remain governed by long-term economics, and reafﬁrm our stated proﬁt and growth objectives over any
reasonable time frame.
We estimate net premiums written in the auto insurance segment of the industry grew 3.7%* in 2004, down
from the prior three year average of 8.0%, reﬂecting low increases in average premium per policy. The top 15
private passenger auto insurers, accounting for about 72% market share, again outperformed the industry in
both growth and proﬁtability, further supporting our view that consolidation will continue. We continue to
believe scale, execution in information technology, pricing segmentation, superior claims handling, and brand
development are all leading factors contributing to consolidation, as well as the differentiating factors within
the consolidating group. Compared to the other 14 private passenger auto insurers, Progressive’s Direct
Business was the fastest growing player at 16.5% and our Agency Business, at 9.5%, slotted in ﬁfth.
The artwork makes the atmosphere very pleasant. There are times when I need a breather from the phones and I can
walk away and focus on the art. Sometimes that’s enough to keep me sane.
17
Mercury
Geico
Progressive
Safeco
AIG
St. Paul
American Family
Hartford
Nationwide
Liberty Mutual
State Farm
Metropolitan
Allstate
105
100
95
90
85
2004 (estimated)
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
h
t
w
o
r
G
-5%
110
Combined Ratio
2000– 2004 (estimated)
23%
18%
13%
8%
3%
-2%
-7%
h
t
w
o
r
G
-12%
Combined Ratio
State Farm
AIG
Mercury
Progressive
Geico
Liberty Mutual
Safeco
Hartford
Nationwide
St. Paul
Metropolitan
American Family
Allstate
110
105
100
95
90
Note: The above disclosure excludes two reciprocal companies, Zurich and USAA, due to uncertainty regarding the comparability
of the data. Results disclosed were estimated by Progressive based on actual results through the ﬁrst nine months of 2004, as
reported by the National Underwriter Insurance Data Services; actual results may vary. The size of the circles is proportionate to
each company’s estimated 2004 net premiums written.
*Based on our internal analysis, using actual results through the ﬁrst nine months of 2004, we estimate the annual growth rate in the
personal auto insurance market to be 3.7%; A.M. Best reported an estimated growth rate of 4.7% for 2004.
18
What were the important advances on the strategic agenda?
Brand On September 21st, we announced “Drive Insurance from Progressive,” a brand focused on and
designed for our independent agents and insurance brokers. All indications suggest this launch was exception-
ally well received by agents. Providing consumers the choice of both an agency-distributed product, now sold
as Drive Insurance from ProgressiveSM, and a direct-to-consumer product, Progressive DirectSM,
is strategically
important positioning for Progressive, and this branding provides additional clarity.
We have long recognized that the speciﬁcs of product design and competitive focus within each distribution
channel are very different and each warrant, and will be advanced by, separate identities. With this brand
introduction, we have completed our organization of the company around our primary offerings — Agency
Personal Lines, Direct Personal Lines and Commercial Auto.
With a separate and distinctive Agency brand, we expect to enhance our positioning with agents and provide
them with a more effective marketing voice by promoting their service proposition to consumers through
television, Yellow Page and other advertising. More than 80% of all auto insurance sold in the United States is
written through captive and independent agents. We believe the ongoing development of a premier brand in
this important marketplace will be a signiﬁcant component of our future growth and our ability to compete
with both independent- and captive-agent-based companies.
Creating two top share brands in personal auto is a key initiative, and in 2004 we took a huge step forward.
Building on this introduction with agents and brokers will be a focus of our Agency Business in 2005.
Claims Our Claims organization deserves considerable credit for continued progress on their quality agenda.
By our most objective measures, we achieved our best claim ﬁle quality in 2004 and the overwhelming trend
continues to be steady and consistent improvement. The relationship between great claim ﬁle quality, customer
satisfaction and accurate payments is undeniable, although sometimes difﬁcult to measure except in overall
The Progressive Corporation and Subsidiaries
Drive Insurance from
Progressive
Human
Resources
Claims
Companywide Resources
Progressive Direct
Finance
Information
Technology
Progressive
Commercial
19
results. Our focus on claims quality is no longer a response to a problem, in fact far from it. Rather, we are now
challenging ourselves against a standard we call “Virtually Perfect.” This standard requires a level of perform-
ance such that we would be delighted if every claim ﬁle were handled in exactly the same way were it to be
handled again. This is a demanding standard that is central to our long-term success. We work harder at, and
care more about, claims management than most—I think it shows.
Our strategic initiative to change physical damage handling from a we-will-pay-for-your-loss mindset to a
we-will-handle-all-aspects-of-the-repair mindset (aka concierge-level service), had an important and largely
successful year. With 20 concierge centers open and a sufﬁcient number of eligible vehicles passing through
them, we are now at an evaluation scale where execution against design speciﬁcations is crucial. We demand
of ourselves not only the execution standards, but the process ﬂows, physical designs and geographic optimiza-
tion necessary for thoughtful expansion.
While disappointed we did not open more centers in 2004, our discipline and planning has positioned us
well for expansion throughout 2005 and 2006. I look forward to an appreciable and growing percentage of our
customers and claimants experiencing concierge-level claims service.
The newest component of this level of service is ﬁnding and offering to our customers the choice of a replace-
ment vehicle rather than just payment when we declare their car un-repairable. We are testing this in limited
locations and we now know enough to believe that, while difﬁcult to do, it can be an effective economic tool
as well as a way for our claims representatives to create extraordinary customer experiences. We expect
signiﬁcant expansion in 2005.
Commitment to improve our customer experiences was evident throughout our Claims organization in 2004
as we added emphasis to listening to the customer by seeking more feedback. Much of the feedback is, as
hoped for, excellent, but frankly we learn more when we identify and recognize opportunities for improvement.
We are very conscious that our aspiration to be recognized as the preeminent consumer franchise in auto
insurance is not yet a market reality and understand the intensity of commitment required. We’re signed up for
the long haul on this one.
Even if someone doesn’t like a certain piece, it creates conversations —which makes it a joy to come to work each day.
20
I have always
enjoyed the art
because it is so
different and
it forces you to
ask questions.
It encourages
you to try and
understand,
“what was this
artist thinking?”
Technology Billing options and payment ﬂexibility are vitally important functions for us, but often got less
focus in the priority of technology advancements and we had, by our own demanding standards, fallen behind.
Replacing our billing system and beginning to deploy an improved claims management platform highlight the
year’s accomplishments in technology.
Our real technology strength remains the close business integration and the numerous opportunities seized
to continuously improve everything we do in cost-effective ways. We remain committed to a level of technology
investment that ensures we never constrain our business opportunities. In 2005, we will make meaningful
progress on improved customer management systems and an infrastructure plan that will ensure yet another
performance increment to our level of system availability and disaster preparedness.
New Horizons During the year, we allocated signiﬁcant resources to evaluate our objectives against the chang-
ing business environment in New Jersey, one of only two states in which we do not underwrite personal auto
(the other being Massachusetts). We were encouraged to ﬁnd a business climate more congruent with our
objectives. Assuming successful promulgation of the currently proposed ratemaking regulations, we expect
to make product ﬁlings for one or more of our offerings in 2005. New Jersey consumers will almost certainly
beneﬁt from the signiﬁcant changes occurring in the competitive landscape. Two of the top 15 companies have
entered the state’s $6 billion market in the past 18 months and we are optimistic about our entry.
We respect the efforts of many in the New Jersey state government to effect thoughtful and meaningful
change. We are currently active in New Jersey, handling claims for our customers traveling through the state,
as well as participating as a servicing carrier for the Commercial Auto Insurance Plan (CAIP).
Customer Retention Estimates of customer relationship life expectancy, like loss reserves, are estimates of
future outcomes based on past behaviors. Our science of developing customer relationship life expectancy
estimates for business about to be acquired and the future life expectancy for business already acquired, at a
detailed level, under varying market conditions, is not yet as well developed as analytical methods used in other
parts of our business. The true complexity of measurement is easily disguised by the conceptual simplicity. Our
product managers have a growing appreciation for the importance of accurate measures and an understand-
ing of how such knowledge can be used to advance our business.
We are at our best when challenged. Improving retention is a challenge we have accepted. By our current
best measures, 2004 did not produce the degree or speed of retention improvement we had hoped for and is
reason for some disappointment. However, I have more than cautious optimism as we continue to attack this
opportunity and list it among the key initiatives of the Company. We have always recognized that good customer
service, efficient operations and fair pricing were necessary conditions for success in our business. The
challenge we currently face is one of degree. As a culture, we now recognize and accept that the only standard
for which we will be rewarded with the loyalty we seek is one that combines extraordinary customer experience
and total competency in everything we do, all at an attractive price.
Investments and Capital Management
The ﬁnancial market results were “not what you’d expect” when the Federal Reserve Board raised rates ﬁve
times. Although short-term interest rates moved higher, from historically low levels at the start of the year, longer-
term rates initially increased then reversed course to ﬁnish lower on the year. Equity markets rallied on solid
corporate earnings and wide margins. Our portfolio managers executed well on our investment strategy,
maintaining about an 85% portfolio allocation to high-quality, intermediate-duration, ﬁxed-income securities
and 15% to indexed equities, while reducing exposure to interest-rate risk. The portfolio ended the year with a
total return of 5.2%. At year end, our ﬁxed-income securities had a weighted average credit quality of AA and
duration of 2.9 years.
Our overall investment and capital management objective remains the same: Ensure that our insurance
operations have sufﬁcient capital to support all the insurance we can proﬁtably underwrite and service.
We ended 2004 with $13.1 billion in invested assets, up from $12.5 billion in December 2003. But that
is not the whole story. With the release of our August results, we announced a “Dutch auction” tender offer
to purchase up to 17.1 million of our outstanding Common Shares. The tender period closed on October15th
and 16.9 million shares were tendered. Those shares were purchased at $88 per share for a total cost of
$1.5 billion. In addition, we repurchased 1.7 million shares for $139.5 million in open market transactions.
We ended 2004 with 200.4 million Common Shares outstanding, compared to 216.4 million shares at the
beginning of the year.
21
Our long-standing and continuing position on capital management is that we will repurchase shares when
our capital position, view of the future, and the stock’s price make it attractive to do so. The tender offer in 2004
was our attempt to execute on this position in the most transparent manner possible respecting, and we hope
accommodating, the varied investment objectives of our owners. We continued to operate well within all of our
stated ﬁnancial policies post the transaction, speciﬁcally our targeted debt-to-total capital ratio which ended
the year at 20%. Our transition from the use of stock options to restricted stock for equity-based compensation
is now also effectively complete. The shares purchased in this tender offer have offset the remaining unexercised
stock options. Our commitment to neutralizing dilution from equity-based compensation will be ongoing for
restricted stock and matched in the year of issue.
I reported last year that we would begin a process in 2004 to slowly increase operating leverage through higher
premiums-to-surplus ratios in our insurance subsidiaries. We ended 2004 at a 2.9 ratio. Our ongoing policy will
be to continue to increase operating leverage to efﬁcient levels, while staying below applicable state regulations.
Walking into my ﬁrst training class, I missed the cafeteria entrance and headed down the basement hall. Hanging
over the copier and some storage boxes I saw 7 of Andy Warhol’s 10 faces of Mao Tse Tung. Apparently they used to
hang in the lobby, but it caused a political question so they got moved to the basement. I’d seen them in Time magazine
and remember thinking what a fabulous place Progressive must be to have this kind of art out for the employees.
That’s quite an impression to have lasted for over 28 years.
22
Company Communication
We continuously look for ways to enhance the quality of our communications with owners and analysts. In
2004, we offered management commentary with our monthly results in anticipation of speciﬁc questions and
produced a quarterly online update to the shareholders’ letter. The update replaced the prepared commentary
previously provided at the start of our investor relations conference calls. Our conference calls, now timed to
follow the release of our SEC quarterly ﬁlings, are simply an opportunity to address further questions. We hope
these changes have been effective and meaningful.
The Progressive Culture
In large part, this report is a way to present an accounting of the Company and quantiﬁcation of assets. There
are, of course, crucial assets that simply do not get accounted for in any GAAP measure—the people and the
culture of a company.
Succinctly describing the culture of Progressive has always eluded me, but I would suggest it is dramatically
undervalued and cannot be reﬂected on a formal balance sheet.
Our vision, values and objectives help set the tone. Being rewarded competitively is an essential ingredient,
but there remains a set of intangible factors that seem to deﬁne a culture where people enjoy working hard,
growing constantly and performing well. I believe it is in these intangibles that the real Progressive lies. In some
cases, our tools, techniques or methods, often valued by others, have been duplicated, but our culture is not
transportable. We achieve little of note without a strong sense of mission and a culture to match. Whether or
not we will ever accurately describe our culture, it is real, it is not perfect, but it is us. The theme of this report
is our work environment, which through the use of art in the workplace, is just one more dimension of our
culture that seeks to encourage and reward initiative, risk, innovation and constant improvement.
Nowhere was our company culture more obvious in 2004 than in our response to the four hurricanes that
pounded Florida and other Southeastern states. The economic effects of the hurricanes were well reported,
but for us the real story was the extraordinary actions and initiatives taken by our people, many of whom were
dealing with their own storm-related problems. During those challenging days, our people were doing what
we do best: helping others get back to normal. With assistance from around the country and every area of the
company, claims were managed relatively seamlessly and resolved quickly after each incident. Customers were
generous with their praise at such a trying time.
We are motivated by our aspiration of becoming Consumers’ No.1 Choice for Auto Insurance and enter 2005
with exciting momentum and energy for executing key business initiatives, as well as a continued commitment
to enhance our culture and work environment.
We deeply appreciate the customers we are privileged to serve, the more than 27,000 Progressive people
who make it all possible, the agents and brokers who choose to represent us and shareholders who believe in
our game plan.
Glenn M. Renwick
President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
The artwork is refreshing to look at and it’s healthy for the mind. I ﬁnd new details and concepts within many of the
pieces even if it’s something I’m familiar with or have seen many times before.
It makes me think. I like it.
OPERATIONS SUMMARY
24
Drive Insurance from Progressive – Relax, just driveSM
Progressive’s Agency Business had a good year in 2004. We continued to enjoy our position as the nation’s largest
writer of private passenger auto insurance through independent agencies by growing net premiums written10% to
$7.9 billion. Our Agency Business represents approximately 5% of the total U.S.personal auto insurance market.
The auto insurance market continued to soften throughout 2004 and quoting activity tapered off. New
application volume, while strong for the market conditions, did not grow over 2003. Our auto policies in force
grew 7% to 4.25 million, driven largely by policy renewals. Loss trends were more favorable then expected,
particularly claim frequency, resulting in a year-end combined ratio of 86.0.
The Agency Business introduced its new agency brand, Drive Insurance from ProgressiveSM. The brand high-
lights the choice and service that independent agencies offer consumers, as well as the superior claims service
and ﬁnancial strength associated with Progressive. Agent reaction has been positive, and we are now in the
early stages of consumer advertising. Technology investments parallel the branding message. Our new
Web site, driveinsurance.com, enables consumers to ﬁnd local agents representing Drive Insurance from
Progressive and obtain a quote online from that agency. We continue to improve our systems capabilities to
enable agents to quickly and easily meet their customer service needs. Additionally, we are well into a country-
wide roll out of a new product design, specifically oriented to our Agency Business, which is intended to
improve an agent’s ability to convert quotes to sales.
Despite an active hurricane season, our Special Lines products, primarily motorcycles, motor homes and
watercraft, had another great year; polices in force grew 18%.
Net Premiums Written (in billions)
Net Premiums Earned (in billions)
Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio
Underwriting expense ratio
Combined ratio
Auto Policies in Force (in thousands)
2004
2003
Change
$
$
7.9
7.9
65.8
20.2
86.0
4,245
$
$
7.2
6.9
68.4
19.6
88.0
3,966
10%
14%
2.6 pts.
(.6) pts.
2.0 pts.
7%
I thought it was weird at ﬁrst, but then I read the description next to the piece and fell in love with it. I can’t
imagine that someone could walk by it and not stop to see what it is about.
Progressive Direct – Think Easier. Think ProgressiveSM
Progressive’s Direct Business had an excellent year growing net premiums written 17% to $3.8 billion, which
represents about 2.4% of the U.S. personal auto insurance market. While the percentage growth in new
business was lower than in prior years, we remain pleased with Direct’s continued strong growth and future
prospects, particularly from our Internet operations.
Despite an increase in advertising spending in 2004 as compared to 2003, our relative share of voice fell as
many competitors made substantially greater investments in consumer marketing. Nevertheless, response to
our advertising showed favorable trends, with growth in both quotes and sales.
Average premium levels and customer retention measures showed little change from the prior year. We
made further investments in our customer experience initiatives, and hope to see continued increases in
customer satisfaction.
Net Premiums Written (in billions)
Net Premiums Earned (in billions)
Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio
Underwriting expense ratio
Combined ratio
Auto Policies in Force (in thousands)
2004
2003
Change
$
$
3.8
3.7
65.5
20.4
85.9
2,084
$
$
3.3
3.1
67.4
20.3
87.7
1,852
17%
20%
1.9 pts.
(.1) pts.
1.8 pts.
13%
26
Commercial Auto
Commercial Auto had another strong year. Net premiums written grew 19% to $1.6 billion, representing about
6% of the U.S. commercial auto insurance market. New applications were slightly ahead of 2003 and, com-
bined with strong renewals, led to a 15% increase in policies in force by year-end. Our favorable combined ratio
was driven by an increase in renewal policies with lower expenses and lower than expected frequency.
During the year, industry rate levels remained relatively stable while many competitors expanded their prod-
uct offerings by accepting business lines and vehicles they had rejected in the previous two years. We introduced
our product line in three new states in 2004, bringing the total number of states in which we offer our commer-
cial auto product to 45, and plan on adding one or two more states in 2005. By our estimate, we ﬁnished 2004
as the ﬁrst or second largest writer of commercial auto premium in 11 states.
Signiﬁcant investments were made in our Truck Physical Damage Claims organization. The ﬁeld specialist
staff was signiﬁcantly increased and new procedures were introduced to improve the accuracy and timeliness
of settlements. In January 2005, we opened what we believe to be the insurance industry’s ﬁrst claims train-
ing facility dedicated to commercial vehicle physical damage estimation. Our goal is to consistently be the leader
in helping customers get their trucks repaired and back in service as soon as possible. We made substantial
progress toward that objective this past year.
I believe art should be a part of our everyday lives instead of tucked away in a museum. Progressive is the only
company I have seen to actually make that belief a reality.
Net Premiums Written (in billions)
Net Premiums Earned (in billions)
Loss and loss adjustment expense ratio
Underwriting expense ratio
Combined ratio
Auto Policies in Force (in thousands)
27
$
$
2004
1.6
1.5
59.7
19.2
78.9
420
2003
Change
$
$
1.4
1.2
62.7
19.8
82.5
365
19%
24%
3.0 pts.
.6 pts.
3.6 pts.
15%
I ﬁnd myself taking a certain route to an area just because I like the art I pass on the way.
NOTES TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
(December 31, 2004, 2003 and 2002)
29
Basis of Presentation —The accompanying consolidated
ﬁnancial statements include the accounts of The Progressive
Corporation, its subsidiaries and afﬁliate (the Company).
These ﬁnancial statements should be read in conjunction with
the complete Consolidated Financial Statements, including
complete Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements, as