A comparatively weak quarter — with some brighter signs emerging slowly.
The second quarter results are easily characterized by reduced written and earned premium on a
year-over-year basis, and a significant decrease in operating margin of 5.7 points from a year
earlier. Combined, these results contributed to a quarterly net income decline of 29% compared to
last year. There is no question these are tough comparisons and not the numerical results we seek.
The comparative picture taken alone does not accurately reflect our progress on execution of a
strategy we first communicated last year at this time and most recently provided a status report on
at our Investor Relations meeting in New York. Having concluded that the loss trends of recent
years driven largely by reduced frequency were more systemic than cyclical, we have been adjusting
our pricing to reflect our consistently stated goal of growing as fast as possible at a 96 combined
ratio. The second quarter results highlight many of the expected outcomes. Each of our three
primary business groups — Agency and Direct Personal Lines and our Commercial Auto Business — are
priced at lower average written premium per policy than at this time a year ago. At the investor
meeting, we showed the personal auto earned premium per earned car year to be down about 4% in both
our Agency and Direct businesses. Commercial Auto is down 5% on the same basis. Earned premium is
a lagged measure to written premium and the decline on a unit basis for personal auto written
premium is 1% — 2% greater with significant variance by individual state and channel. Thus, we
expect the earned premium per unit to follow written in coming months. Adjusting rates is a
continuous process, but we believe the most significant downward adjustments are behind us and, as
a general statement we are closer today to our targeted run-rate margins in most states and most
products.
These rating actions were consistent with our desire to grow as fast as possible, which we have
clarified as “grow our customer counts” as fast as possible. At the beginning of the third quarter
last year, we were starting to experience sequential monthly declines in overall policy counts as
the market provided more competitive options. The rating changes implemented over the last year
have been an explicit trade-off of margin for longer-term customer growth. While we will never know
the outcome of alternative decisions, we feel very good about the focus on customer growth.
Nevertheless, our Agency auto policies in force counts are running slightly lower than a year ago,
and we have struggled to find any overall significant growth in these market conditions. Selected
states are more attractive, and new business growth has now returned in 32 states. Our Direct
personal auto business has seen more encouraging results from the rate changes and is ahead of last
year’s policy counts by 5%. The trend to Internet sales continued during the quarter and Internet
new business sales continue to grow faster than any other segment year over year. For the second
quarter and first six months of 2007, new business applications increased 3% and 2%, respectively,
in our Personal Lines businesses, compared to decreases of 8% for both periods last year. Our
highly seasonal special lines business continues to grow policy counts acceptably at 7% over last
year’s second quarter, and similarly our Commercial Auto policy counts are up 6%.
While growth has been slower than we prefer, we did surpass the 10 million Personal Lines customers
mark during the quarter.
Loss results for the quarter largely reflect normal conditions, including some extreme weather
events. Most notable during the quarter was an unexpected adjustment to reserves for uninsured
motorist coverage exposures in our special lines and Commercial Auto businesses which we do not
expect to be recurring and some additional unfavorable prior year loss development primarily
related to reserve reviews of larger losses in our personal and commercial auto books. Our
progression toward our 96 combined ratio is planned and an expected outcome consistent with our
rate changes. The second quarter combined ratio for personal auto was 92.5, comparable but slightly
lower than the first quarter’s 92.9, while the special lines combined ratio was significantly
higher, reflecting normal seasonality and the noted uninsured motorist issue.
Our focus
on customer satisfaction and retention produced some positive signs during the
quarter. Our primary retention measure, policy life expectancy, continued to improve during the
quarter in most businesses and tiers. The final month of the quarter continued the trend provided
at the investor meeting in June.
Our adoption of the Net Promoter Score as a consistent measure of customer
satisfaction, and one we believe may be a leading indicator of future retention, provided
encouraging progress during the quarter. Steady gains have been observed in our Personal Lines
Businesses during each of the last six months and seem to be directly attributable to a combination
of our rating actions and customer experience actions in claims, as well as in online and phone
servicing.
Our branding and advertising initiatives continued to gain momentum during the quarter. Our
research suggests that consumers are increasingly becoming aware of Progressive’s level of service
and our competitive prices. Our advertising spend for both the quarter and year-to-date has
increased over the same periods last year with a shift to more Internet and television advertising
and less spending on direct mail. Much of this additional Internet and TV advertising is targeted
at closing the awareness gap regarding our service advantages. Ongoing consumer research is showing
improvement in key measures of our brand equity.
While consistent with our actions, the quarter was a disappointment numerically. Actions regarding
rate reductions, advertising and customer experience appear to be heading in the right direction
and our concierge claims offering continues to show all the promise we had hoped for. We will stay
the course and, over time, expect to report continuing improvement in retention and branding
measures, along with stronger growth measures.
Glenn M. Renwick
President and Chief Executive Officer
Net Promoter is a registered trademark of Satmetrix Systems, Inc.