The top-line results for the first quarter were our most disappointing for some time.
For the quarter, aggregate growth measures were slow, and it was late into the quarter before we
saw any measurable response to the more aggressive rating actions we had previously announced.
Margins remained strong at 10.5%, even with higher mid-quarter frequency from seasonal storms.
While still strong, our current margin suggests some closure of the gap between our reaffirmed
target of a 4% underwriting profit and the last several years of sustained double-digit margins;
this measure moves slowly and rates from new premium levels are not reflected instantaneously in
aggregate numbers. We believe we are on the correct course in evaluating the trade-offs between
growth and margin with additional opportunities in selected segments. As we expected, reaction to
lowering prices is less dramatic in the current market, defined by relative rate stability or
reduction.
It is no longer news to talk about reduced frequency, although over the last several years this has
been the most significant external influence that has caused the industry to reshuffle and
ultimately begin to settle at new, and lower, price levels. We have generally responded quickly to
upward pricing pressure and more hesitantly to downward pressures for the fear of a reversal and
subsequent rate shock to our customers. The quarter did not suggest any highly notable changes in
frequency or severity, outside of seasonality and some rapidly rising costs in PIP coverage,
particularly in New York.
Since signaling our commitment to respond to the low-cost environment, we have reduced our average
premiums per auto policy in the range of 2-4%, with selected segments showing wider and deeper
ranges. While average premiums are influenced by a number of mix issues, such as selected limits
and vehicle-age composition, because of the 2-4% reduction referenced above, it is reasonable to
conclude that we will face a deflationary effect on premium per policy, period-over-period, for
some time. Appropriately, our focus has been on unit growth and we have adapted our most important
measures of performance to reflect the emphasis on growth in polices in force. Total policies in
force for the quarter grew by about 220,000, or 2.2%, from year-end 2006 and about 3% from the same
period in 2006.
Our Direct Business’s private passenger auto product policies in force grew about 5% year over year,
responding quite well to recent rate actions with increased new business conversion and early signs
of improving retention. The shift to both Internet quoting and complete policy purchase online
continues to be notable for this business and during the quarter we increased availability of
“e-fulfillment,” paperless fulfillment of an auto insurance policy. Similar efforts to reduce
paper billing
forms during the life of a policy have been well received and, in some markets, are
even better received when we test our offer to fund the planting of a tree for each customer who
enrolls.
By the end of the first quarter, we experienced new private passenger auto business application
growth in half of our states for both our Agency and Direct Businesses. We have several large and
important states that are not meeting our growth objectives and they have a disproportionate
influence on aggregate numbers. Florida, Texas and Virginia top this list and have our attention.
We have made some exciting and definitive steps to address identified structural impediments to
meeting our long-term customer rate expectations that we believe will lead to improved retention in
the future. Our retention focus, discussed in great depth in our recent year-end report, remains
appropriately intense and multi-faceted. During the quarter, both our retention and our estimation
of policy life measures increased in almost every tier, but still trail the performance of the same
period a year ago. Directionally this is an encouraging result and consistent with our efforts,
but there is still considerable opportunity for significant improvement. Retention gains are
critical for ongoing growth in policies in force, especially given the slowed growth in new
applications. Renewal policies now account for 78% of our book of private passenger auto policies.
During the quarter, we aired the first television commercials produced in collaboration with our
new ad agency. The initial focus was on telling the story of our concierge claims offering and
just what consumers should expect from this distinctive service. With over 50 operating centers,
we are now in a position to promote the service more broadly and the commercials are having the
intended positive effect of increasing consumers’ awareness of the service. Our customer
satisfaction measures and ultimate retention of those who used the service are some of the most
encouraging of any offering we have made. We are now positioned to capitalize on this concept and
expect to increase our marketing focus and price attractiveness in areas where we offer the
service.
While this is clearly a challenging period in which to demonstrate growth consistent with our
aspirations, the slower growth has created, and will continue to create, appropriate focus on our
most important operational challenges. We are genuinely excited by the potential for increased
performance on several fronts.
/s/ Glenn M. Renwick
Glenn M. Renwick
President and Chief Executive Officer
