The structure of this report has
changed. We will now provide
an easy reading summary of the
year along with ﬁnancial high-
lights but not attempt to repro-
duce in exact form the contents
of our complete ﬁnancial state-
ments, which are included as a
companion piece. I hope you
will ﬁnd this format, along with
its electronic equivalents, respon-
sive to your needs.
We had a great year.
In my letter to you last year, I reported we had
improved profits but policy growth was just
beginning to gain momentum. I predicted that
if this trend were to continue, we would look
forward to, and felt prepared for, the second
phase of the cycle — proﬁtable growth.
I am delighted to report we were prepared
and did take full advantage of our positioning
and market conditions, growing 30% in net
premiums written, achieving an underwriting
margin of 7.6% and posting record net income
of $667.3 million.
8
9
WA
OR
ID
MT
WY
NV
CA
UT
CO
AZ
NM
ND
SD
NE
TX
HI
AK
Personal Lines Net Premiums Written Growth
MN
IA
WI
MI
IL
IN
OH
WV
KS
MO
OK
KY
TN
ME
VT
NH
MA
CT RI
NY
NJ
DE
MD
DC
PA
VA
NC
AR
LA
AL
GA
MS
SC
FL
Growth in 49 Markets
> 40%
25% – 40%
< 25%
non active
Progressive’s Financial Goals and Policies
Underwriting Margin:
 calendar year
combined ratio.
Investment Yield:
Manage on a total
return basis.
Portfolio asset allocation
of % ﬁxed income
and % equity.
Manage interest rate,
credit, prepayment and
concentration risk.
Financial Leverage:
Maintain debt ratio
between % and %
of total capital.
>
>
>
>
ROE = {[ UNDERWRITING MARGIN * (
NPE
SHE
>
)] + [ INVESTMENT YIELD1 * (1+
LIAB
SHE
)] –
INTEREST EXP
SHE
} * (1–
EFFECTIVE
TAX RATE
)
>
Underwriting Leverage:
Grow as fast as possible subject to achieving a
 calendar year combined ratio.
Target premiums-to-surplus ratio at :.
Maintain adequate loss reserves.
Note Formula was derived from the work of Dr. J. Robert Ferrari and his paper
entitled “The Relationship of Underwriting, Investment, Leverage, and Exposure
to Total Return on Owners’ Equity,” and is presented  for illustrative purposes only.
1Represents the sum of investment income and net realized gains/losses on secu-
rities, all as a % of average total assets.
ROE: Return on Average Shareholders’ Equity
NPE: Net Premiums Earned
SHE: Average Shareholders’ Equity
LIAB: Average Liabilities
10
Objectives and Policies
Focus on our goals, and a clear understanding of prior-
ity among them, is key to our success. In 2002, we
achieved all three of our business goals:
Achieve a 4% Underwriting Proﬁt on All Products and Segments. We at-
tained a .% margin.This is the most important goal, and super-
cedes our growth goal.The  investment climate demonstrated
the importance of our continuing focus on underwriting proﬁt.
Our product manager structure is central to quick and effec-
tive response to local market conditions. In , we performed
over  rate and program revisions designed to maintain rate ad-
equacy in the  regulatory markets we serve. Product managers
for both the Agent and Direct distribution channels, typically
managing one or two states, assume signiﬁcant proﬁt and loss
responsibility and their collective actions resulted in  of 
markets operating profitably in personal lines for the year —
most at or better than our target % underwriting proﬁt goal.
Grow as Fast as Possible... Our net premiums written grew %.
For perspective, in an industry with over  insurance com-
pany groups, our written premium growth of . billion in
 exceeded the total auto insurance premium of the 
largest writer of auto insurance in .
Our growth goal, restated last year, is to grow as fast as possible
constrained only by our profit objective and our ability to
provide high quality service. We are acutely aware of the down-
side when growth outpaces ability to maintain consistent
quality. We will always constrain growth when we believe we
are close to that threshold. Matching capacity to growth po-
tential became a central theme for .
15% Return on Shareholders’ Equity, Net of Inﬂation. We beat this goal
in  with a .% return. During , we evaluated all of
our business goals and this one in particular. Taken in concert
with our published ﬁnancial policies, which govern the use of
operating leverage (i.e., underwriting capacity), ﬁnancial lever-
age and investment management, return on equity is largely
an outcome of the ﬁrst two goals — Underwriting Proﬁt and
Growth. Therefore, going forward we will state Progressive’s
financial goals as those for Underwriting Profit and Growth.
We will provide a companion set of ﬁnancial policies covering
underwriting, investing and ﬁnancing.These ﬁnancial goals and
policies are structured to maximize long-term shareholder value.
11
More Disclosure
After our ﬁrst full year of reporting monthly underwriting
results, we are conﬁdent we have achieved a new and
constructive level of reporting detail. We took steps to
enhance the quality of information provided in our quar-
terly releases by adding an accident and calendar year
reconciliation detailing the source and timing of reserve
changes. Additionally, we began offering more detail
about our policies-in-force, speciﬁcally highlighting our
commercial auto insurance business — our fastest
growing unit in 2002.
Accident and calendar year reconciliation is critically impor-
tant for an accurate assessment of any auto insurer and speaks
directly to the quality of earnings that are reported in the some-
what artificial, but convenient, structure of the calendar. In
June, we again published our Report on Loss Reserving Practices.
In keeping with the theme of this report, ‘transparency,’ we
attempt to share with our owners and observers critical infor-
mation used to run the business. Monthly reporting highlights
events and monthly variations that would otherwise be less clear
in quarterly reporting.
Market Conditions and Our View of the Future
Throughout the course of the year, we observed differ-
ent competitors withdraw, constrain new business, ﬁle
for double-digit rate increases and even become insol-
vent. These actions were caused by inadequate prior
price levels, new reinsurance market restrictions and
poor investment returns. For some, conditions were ex-
acerbated by poor homeowner insurance results. While
many of these actions were taken by insurers with
smaller market shares, even the market share leader
took signiﬁcant corrective action to address poor results.
We beneﬁted from these conditions.
The market is consolidating; market share of the top  com-
panies has grown to about %, up from % in, with only
 companies with more than % market share in . The
demands to develop superior technology solutions, costs to build
a meaningful consumer brand, and challenges to provide dis-
tinctive and valuable service to policyholders will prove to be too
high for some, maybe many, and may lead to even more con-
solidation. Success in the auto insurance sector will increasingly
require scale advantages and consistent execution of a superior
business model at low cost and high value to the consumer.
Progressive’s future will be shaped by our continued invest-
ment in technology solutions, superiority in claims, advance-
ment of pricing and segmentation science, discipline in cost
control and building of a trusted consumer brand. Our focus
will remain on auto insurance. At .% share of the ..personal
auto insurance market, we feel no major market constraint to
sustained growth over the next decade.
13
work
hard
Insurance Operations
Progressive’s Personal Lines written premium in-
creased 29% to $8.4 billion for 2002, with a 22% increase
in policies-in-force and a GAAP combined ratio of 92.5.
A welcome feature of the year, based on renewal and
attrition trends, was a signiﬁcant extension of our policy
life estimates for most lines of business and within
each of our distribution channels. This change in our
estimates comes from a combination of market condi-
tions, increasing use of electronic payment plans, and
a  growing  culture  and  understanding  of  customer
preservation. Our results also reﬂect a year with relatively
few catastrophes and an unexpected, and perhaps
exceptional, drop in claim frequency.
Agent business written premium increased % and auto poli-
cies-in-force increased by %, with a combined ratio of .,
building on and maintaining the rate adequacy achieved the
previous year.
Our technology gives our independent agents electronic
access to their Progressive customers’ data, allowing them to
provide the quality service their customers expect in a more
responsive manner. We made considerable progress this year in
key initiatives directed at increasing quote accuracy at time of
delivery by validating data in real time, increasing policy changes
made directly by agents (now over % of agent policy change
requests), and eliminating paper ﬁles and reports.
With our commitment to expanding technology and improving
workﬂows that assist our agents, we have attained an expense
ratio comparable to or lower than any competitor who distrib-
utes through agents.
Direct business written premium increased % and auto
policies-in-force increased by %, with a combined ratio of
., as we built on our investment in this alternative way for
consumers to shop. Our efforts have focused on advancing our
acquisition science (ensuring we harvest the appropriate volume
and mix of business for all advertising expenditures), improving
the customer experience, and, where viable, expanding our ad-
vertising and media modes to reach more potential customers.
Media costs were very favorable in , and while we expect
to see them ﬁrm somewhat going forward, we feel comfortable
with the outlook. All advertising costs, including development
of new creative campaigns and media placements, are expensed
as incurred. During the course of the year, we further devel-
oped our High Expectations television advertising campaign that
promotes comparison-shopping and the use of the Internet for
quoting and buying.
For a growing number of consumers, the Internet provides
a very convenient way to buy or quote insurance and this
activity is a catalyst to our growth. I expect this trend to con-
tinue and feel terriﬁc about our leadership in online sales and
service functionality.
Special Lines insurance products, primarily motorcycles,
motor homes and watercraft, had a tremendous year with close
to % growth in policies-in-force. We are the market share
leader in motorcycle insurance with approximately % share.
Even so, we are conﬁdent we can leverage our strong reputa-
tion in this line to capture greater share.
Commercial Auto business had a milestone year, surpassing one
billion dollars in written premium, a % plus increase, %
increase in policies-in-force, and a combined ratio of ..
The combination of conditions similar to those seen in the pri-
vate passenger auto insurance market and our own pricing
adequacy allowed us to provide our agents with consistent
product availability when others were forced to constrain. Our
current and future success in this line depends on our continued
focus on the market segments we understand, disciplined pric-
ing and excellent claims service.This year’s increased reporting
on this part of our business highlights its ongoing importance.
Claims. Nowhere is the issue of matching capacity to growth
potential more critical than in claims management. Our claims
management agenda in  was all about execution on three
fronts: building capacity, improving quality and development
of a new method of handling physical damage losses.
Building Claim Capacity – Because there is no substitute for training
and experience in claims resolution, we aggressively hired new
claim representatives in advance of need. During , we hired
and trained over , external new claim representatives for a
net increase of over ,. A soft employment market afforded
us high-quality, high-energy adjuster trainees;we averaged  hire
for every  applicants. In addition, we provided almost ,
hours of advanced training to more experienced claims people.
Improving Quality – Our internally audited ﬁle quality results and
performance metrics in claims all met expectations and generally
got better. Through greater focus on ﬁle ownership, account-
ability and customer service, we measurably improved our claim
handling quality against standards set such that if we saw the
exact same claim again we would be satisﬁed if we handled it the
same way. We are not easily satisfied and still have opportu-
nities for continued performance improvement, but are delighted
by the results and encouraged by the opportunity.
Setting a New Standard for Vehicle Claims Repair – In last year’s letter,
I presented an example of a better consumer experience and
outlined our test plan to create it. We want to reform the vehi-
cle repair process, increase consumer satisfaction, increase our
productivity, and improve the cycle time and quality of repair.
I am happy to report our prototypes met our acceptance crite-
ria and we have expanded to seven sites with  more planned
for .This initiative will profoundly change claims handling
and become a key element of our consumer brand.
Achieving balanced execution and success on all three initia-
tives, while reducing our loss adjustment expense, was a standout
performance when we needed it most.
Looking forward to , we remain very conscious of the
balance between growth and qualiﬁed capacity. We like what we
see so far and will remain obsessive about trying to get it right.
We aspire to be recognized as the pre-eminent consumer fran-
chise in auto insurance and understand that this requires an ex-
traordinary commitment to service delivery. During , we
improved in all areas of customer service and focused on greater
integration between product design and service capability. We
encourage and seek consumer feedback and we get much
that is truly heartfelt and encouraging. Our surveys all show
improving customer service, but valid complaints and certain
survey data tells us our task is still far from done.
Segway In , Segway 
announced the consumer avail-
ability of the Segway™Human
Transporter (), the world’s ﬁrst
dynamically stabilized, self-bal-
ancing transportation device, and
plans to begin shipping units in
. I make no projections on
the future impact of the Segway
, but as an owner, I can tell
you it’s an eye-opening experi-
ence. It seemed only ﬁtting that
Progressive should be a part of
this transportation innovation.
To that end, with Segway we have
created the ﬁrst insurance prod-
uct for Segway  owners.
17
Some Other Notable Actions
Our year was clearly characterized by the excellent
underwriting results already discussed, but there were
several more points of note.
A signiﬁcant expense was the settlement of several long-stand-
ing class-action lawsuits. Without commenting on the basis,
merits or decisions to settle, I can report that we settled putative
class-action suits on diminution of value, handling of better-
ment in claim settlements, use of alternative agent commission
programs and a California-specific labor classification claim.
Approximately  million for these settlements is reﬂected in
 results. We have adjusted our operations to reduce the
chance of these exposures reoccurring.
Early in , we concluded that our entry into homeown-
ers insurance was not meeting the objectives we had set, to
increase and support our auto business, and ended the initiative.
Bundling homeowners and auto insurance is a common prac-
tice and, although recent survey data suggest the requirement
is declining for customers, we know it’s a challenge to our
auto-only strategy.
We have decided to use restricted stock (instead of our prac-
tice of using non-qualiﬁed stock option grants) as the vehicle for
long-term compensation of senior management and to begin
using it in accordance with the  incentive plan if approved by
shareholders. After considerable thought about our use of stock
options, and less about the accounting of them, it became clear
that the use of restricted stock for long-term compensation is
more aligned with shareholder interests and has the additional
beneﬁt of clearly deﬁned cost and accounting treatment.
Capital and Investment Management
Progressive chooses to take risk in, and expects com-
mensurate returns from, underwriting auto insurance.
Thus, the primary objective of capital management is to
always have sufficient capital to support all the insur-
ance we can proﬁtably underwrite and service. We man-
age investments to reflect our broader financial goals
and shareholder value by focusing on total return (re-
curring investment income and realized and unrealized
gains/losses on securities).
We posted a fully taxable equivalent total return on our invest-
ment portfolio of .% for the year. Our asset allocation of
approximately % in ﬁxed income and % in common equi-
ties is designed to optimize portfolio diversiﬁcation. The two
asset classes produced widely divergent results. Common stock
holdings returned -.% while ﬁxed income assets produced a
return of .%.We modestly reduced our interest rate risk by
lowering the portfolio duration by half a year to around . years.
In a year when preservation of shareholder capital was a chal-
lenge to business in general, we are happy to end the year with
shareholders’ equity of . billion (up over half a billion) and
a strong and liquid balance sheet. We ended  with . bil-
lion in invested assets, up from . billion last December. Our
portfolio grew due to strong cash ﬂows from operations, invest-
ment returns and proceeds from a  million debt issuance in
November . After a difﬁcult year for the capital markets, we
enter  in a very strong position with the necessary capital (at
an attractive cost) that we need to fund our immediate growth.
In March , we announced a : stock split consistent with
our policy of splitting the stock if the price exceeds  for a
reasonable period of time.
We also reaffirmed our position that we would repurchase
shares when our capital position, view of the future and the
stock’s price make it attractive to do so. We also repurchase
shares to neutralize the dilution from stock options. During the
year, we repurchased . million shares and ended the year with
. million shares outstanding as compared with . mil-
lion shares, on a split-adjusted basis, at year-end .
We estimated and reflected in income approximately 
million of ‘Other than Temporary Impairments’during the year.
During , approximately % of our investment portfolio
was in equities, managed to track the Russell  index. We
own the individual securities in the equity index.We perform
ongoing reviews of these stocks and our bonds, evaluating
unrealized losses for impairment, whether issuer specific or
market related, and appropriately reflect ‘Other than Temp-
orary Impairments’ in the income statement as a realized loss.
All other unrealized gains or losses are reﬂected in shareholders’
equity. Our reviews are designed to ensure continuous integrity
in our ﬁnancial disclosure.
18
We are proud to have earned the
.  position in the U.S. Private
Passenger Auto Market, climbing
 places in the last  years.
(ranking estimated based on actual data
through nine months of )
Corporate Governance
Progressive’s Board of Directors meets six times a year.
Board committees, composed entirely of independent
directors, meet with relevant Progressive staff the day
before the Board meeting. That evening, all members
attend a dinner hosted by the Chairman. The ﬁrst order
of business at the formal board meeting are the reports
of the committee chairpersons to the full board.
Two of the six meetings are extended sessions with additional
focus on management interaction, strategy, planning, manage-
ment development and succession, and director training. In
those months without a formal board meeting,Tom Forrester,
, and I hold a conference call with the board Audit Commit-
tee to ensure all relevant matters are addressed on a timely basis.
The primary compensation for board members has been in
stock options; the proposal presented to shareholders will
change this to restricted stock, consistent with the proposed
change for management.
Peter Lewis will continue to chair the Progressive board,
although he became a non-management chairman effective
February , after  years of employment,  as a full-time
employee and  as Chief Executive Ofﬁcer. He leads the ex-
ecutive session of non-management directors held after each
formal board meeting. All other directors besides me, currently
meet the  standards to be deemed independent of man-
agement. Complete details on board composition and com-
mittee assignments are disclosed later in this report and, along
with the committee charters, are available on our Investor
Relations/Corporate Governance Web site.
Progressive is Special. Our objectives are demanding and hard
to achieve.
To become Consumers’. Choice for Auto Insurance re-
quires us to create a consumer proposition that is faster, fairer
and better than any comparable alternative—a proposition so
appealing that it becomes the standard of consumer expecta-
tion. To remain Consumers’ . Choice for Auto Insurance
will require us to create, over and over again, a new consumer
proposition  of offerings  and  service  that  is  continuously
responsive to changing consumer demands. It is this cycle of
innovation and execution fueled by people who enjoy work-
ing hard, growing constantly, performing well and being
rewarded competitively, that is the fabric of Progressive today
and for our future. As we start , I am proud to report that
the nearly , Progressive people are up for, and look for-
ward to, this challenge.
We deeply appreciate the customers we are privileged to serve
and the agents and service representatives in the more than
, independent insurance agencies who did business with
Progressive in . We are grateful for our shareholders’ con-
tinued conﬁdence.To the men and women of Progressive, we
can look back on this year with pride.Thanks for all you do each
day to make Progressive a great company and for all we have
accomplished together in .
Glenn M.Renwick
President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
21
feel
good
Vision, Values, Objectives
Communicating a clear picture of Progressive by stating what we
try to achieve (Vision), how we interact with customers (Customer
Value Proposition), what guides our behavior (Core Values), and what
our people expect to accomplish and how we evaluate perform-
ance (Objectives), permits all people associated with Progressive
to understand their roles and to enjoy their contributions.
Vision
We seek to be an excellent, innovative, growing and
enduring business by cost-effectively and profitably
reducing the human trauma and economic costs of auto
accidents and other mishaps, and by building a recog-
nized, trusted, admired, business-generating brand. We
seek to maximize shareholder value and to provide a
positive environment which attracts quality people who
develop and achieve ambitious growth plans.
Customer Value Proposition
Our Customer Value Proposition provides a litmus test
for customer interactions, relationships and innovation.
Fast, Fair, Better That’s what you can expect from Progressive.
Everything we do recognizes the needs of busy consumers who
are cost-conscious, increasingly savvy about insurance and ready
for easy, new ways to quote, buy and manage their policies, in-
cluding claims service that respects their time and reduces the
trauma and inconvenience of loss.
24
Core Values
Progressive’s Core Values are pragmatic statements of
what works best for us in the real world. They govern
our decisions and behavior. We want them understood
and embraced by all Progressive people. Growth and
change provide new perspective, requiring regular
reﬁnement of Core Values.
Integrity We revere honesty. We adhere to the highest ethical stan-
dards, provide timely, accurate and complete ﬁnancial report-
ing, encourage disclosing bad news and welcome disagreement.
Golden Rule We respect all people, value the differences among
them and deal with them in the way we want to be dealt with. This
requires us to know ourselves and to try to understand others.
Objectives We strive to communicate clearly Progressive’s am-
bitious objectives and our people’s personal and team objectives.
We evaluate performance against all these objectives.
Excellence We strive constantly to improve in order to meet and
exceed the highest expectations of our customers, shareholders
and people. We teach and encourage our people to improve per-
formance and to reduce the costs of what they do for customers.
We base their rewards on results and promotion on ability.
Proﬁt The opportunity to earn a proﬁt is how the competitive
free-enterprise system motivates investment to enhance human
health and happiness. Expanding proﬁts reﬂect our customers’
and claimants’ increasingly positive view of Progressive.
Financial Objectives and Policies
Consistent achievement of superior results requires that
our people understand Progressive’s objectives and
their specific role, and that their personal objectives
dovetail with Progressive’s. Our objectives are ambitious
yet realistic. We are committed to achieving financial
objectives over rolling five-year periods. Progressive
monitors its financial policies continuously and strives
to meet these targets annually. Experience always
clarifies objectives and illuminates better policies. We
constantly evolve as we monitor the execution of our
policies and progress toward achieving our objectives.
Proﬁtability Progressive’s most important goal is for its insurance
subsidiaries to produce an aggregate calendar year % under-
writing proﬁt. Our business is a composite of many products
deﬁned in part by product type, distribution channel, geogra-
phy, tenure of the customer and underwriting grouping. Each
of these products has targeted operating parameters based on
level of maturity, underlying cost structures, customer mix and
policy life expectancy. Our aggregate goal is the balanced blend
of these individual performance targets in any calendar year.
Overall, we had an underwriting proﬁt of .% in , and an
underwriting proﬁt of .% for the past ﬁve years and .% for
the past ten years. Estimated industry results for the personal
auto insurance market for the same periods were underwriting
losses of .%, .% and .%, respectively.
Growth Our goal is to grow as fast as possible constrained only
by our profitability objective and our ability to provide high
quality customer service. Progressive is a growth-oriented com-
pany and management incentives are tied to proﬁtable growth.
We report Personal Lines and Commercial Auto results sep-
arately. We further breakdown our Personal Lines’ results by
channel, Agent and Direct, to give shareholders a more accu-
rate picture of the business dynamics of each distribution
method and their respective rates of growth. Aggregate expense
ratios and aggregate growth rates disguise the true nature and
performance of each business. Personal Lines and Commercial
Auto net premiums written grew % and %, respectively, in