Excellent profitability, solid but slowing growth, and tremendous progress on service initiatives
characterize a very satisfying 2nd quarter.  For the quarter, our combined ratio was 85.4 with net premiums
written growth of 11%.  Our year-to-date combined ratio of 84.3 is substantially better than our estimates of
the dramatically improving industry average (for the 1st quarter, the industry reported combined ratio was
94.2). Our results, along with the rest of the industry, have benefited from the continuing low frequency of
reported claims. Frequency rates are lower than comparable 2003 quarterly and annual periods on all our
coverages.  An expected outcome is that rate inflation is very low. As a result, consumers are experiencing
rates that are stable or possibly lower at renewal.  This translates into fewer consumers actively shopping for a
better rate.  Under these market conditions of less shopping combined with increased marketing intensity from
profitable competition, we expect that our growth in new business will slow.
Contributing to profitability and rate stability are relatively modest trends in severity of losses.   Our observed
bodily injury severity trend for personal auto is within a 2-5% annualized range and our physical damage
severity trend is closer to flat.
As market conditions change, and the so-called insurance cycle goes from “hard” to “soft,” one thing remains
constant – the best service at the lowest price is a winning formula. I have every expectation that we can
outperform the market on growth, as well as profitability, in each phase of the cycle if we continue to improve
and solidify our delivery of faster, fairer, better customer experiences at lower costs.
We have made some meaningful progress in the first half of 2004 that we believe has kept us on course
toward our goal of becoming Consumers’ #1 Choice for Auto Insurance.
Our intensity on claims management continues to produce meaningful improvements in the quality of claims
handling. We are in control with staffing and training and will use this expected somewhat slower period of
hiring to solidify our gains and expand our training in preparation for faster growth that we believe we will
see in the future.
Our initiative to change physical damage claims handling with our concierge level of claims service has had a
very good first six months. The key operating specifications we established for expansion of the concept are
now consistently being met.  We are ready for the next phase of expansion and are currently looking to
establish four more service centers in Florida.  In addition, we are actively scouting locations in four other
states.
Our customer service group has completed a restructuring into three aligned groups:  agency customers, direct
customers and independent agents and brokers. This restructuring will better serve the unique needs of each
group and allow even more opportunity for targeted improvements and efficiencies. In addition, we are
moving forward with creating a brand communication strategy for our independent agencies and their
customers.
On a note of interest, I’m excited to report that Progressive is now the #1 writer of auto insurance in Rhode
Island and Vermont. (We are working hard to achieve the same results in other states). Also, we are in
discussions with New Jersey about the regulatory environment that would be required for Progressive to show
interest in doing business there. At this time, we have no sense whether or not the changes necessary to
interest us in writing in that state will be embraced.
Our overarching objectives going into the second half of 2004 are to maintain momentum by continuing to
seek new business growth when it is smart to do so, increasing policy retention, intensifying the energy
around our key strategies, focusing on training at all levels to take full advantage of new tools and processes,
and constantly positioning ourselves for the next set of market conditions that will favor faster growth.
While pleased with our results and accomplishments so far this year, I’m confident that we have only partially
executed some of our most exciting strategies and that the best is still ahead of us.
Glenn M. Renwick
President and Chief Executive Officer The Progressive Corporation and Subsidiaries