Consolidated Financial Statements 28 Safe Harbor and Corporate Information 36 Directors and Ofﬁcers 38
- ABOUT PROGRESSIVE -
Since the Progressive insurance organization began business in,we have
been innovators—growing into new markets and pioneering new ways to
meet consumers’ needs. In , Progressive Casualty Insurance Company
was founded to be among the ﬁrst specialty underwriters of nonstandard
auto insurance.Today,The Progressive Corporation’s  subsidiaries and an
afﬁliate offer competitive rates and -hour, in-person and online services
to all drivers throughout the United States.
Artist Carlos Vega embraces our chosen theme,a work in progress, through his
painterly use of the collage process—which incorporates layering and juxta-
position of everyday materials found on his recent visit to Progressive’s ofﬁces.
His path of invention, assemblage and discovery serves as a visual metaphor
for Progressive’s ever-evolving business.Vega’s work will now become a part
of Progressive’s growing collection of contemporary art. For a brief history
of Progressive’s art collection, please visit art.progressive.com.
FOR THE YEAR
Net premiums written
Growth over prior year
Net premiums earned
Growth over prior year
Total revenues
Net income
Underwriting margin
Net income per share 1
AT YEAR-END
Common Shares outstanding (millions)
Book value per share
Consolidated shareholders’ equity
Market capitalization
Return on average shareholders’ equity
Market share2
Industry net premiums written3
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999
(billions–except per share amounts)
$ .
$ .
%
%
$ .
$ .
$ .
$ .
%
%
$ .
$ .
$ .
$ .
%
%
$ .
$ .
$ .
$ .
%
%
$ .
$ .
$ .
$ .
%
%
$ .
$ .
.%
$ .
.%
$ .
.%
$ .
(.)%
$ .
.%
$ .
(billions–except shares outstanding and per share amounts)
2003
2002
2001
2000
1999
.
$.
$ .
$ .
.%
.%
$ .
.
$.
$ .
$ .
.%
.%
$.
.
$.
$ .
$ .
.%
.%
$.
.
$.
$ .
$ .
.%
.%
$.
.
$.
$ .
$ .
.%
.%
$.
STOCK PRICE APPRECIATION (DEPRECIATION) 4
Progressive

1-YEAR
3-YEAR
5-YEAR
.%
.%
.%
(.)%
.%
(.)%
1Presented on a diluted basis.
2Represents Progressive’s Personal Lines business.
3Represents personal auto insurance market net premiums written as reported by A.M. Best Company Inc.;  is estimated.
4Represents average annual compounded rate of increase (decrease) and assumes dividend reinvestment.
All share and per share amounts were adjusted for the April ,,-for- stock split.
- VISION -
- CORE VALUES -
We seek to be an excellent, innovative, growing
and enduring business by cost-effectively and
proﬁtably reducing the human trauma and eco-
nomic costs of auto accidents and other mishaps,
and by building a recognized, trusted, admired,
business-generating brand. We seek to maxi-
mize shareholder value and to provide a positive
environment which attracts quality people who
develop and achieve ambitious growth plans.
- CUSTOMER VALUE PROPOSITION -
Our Customer Value Proposition provides a
litmus test for customer interactions, relation-
ships and innovation.
Fast, Fair, Better That’s what you can expect from
Progressive. Everything we do recognizes the
needs of busy consumers who are cost-conscious,
increasingly savvy about insurance and ready
for easy, new ways to quote, buy and manage
their policies, including claims service that
respects their time and reduces the trauma and
inconvenience of loss.
Progressive’s Core Values are pragmatic statements of what works best for
us in the real world.They govern our decisions and behavior.We want them
understood and embraced by all Progressive people. Growth and change
provide new perspective, requiring regular reﬁnement of Core Values.
Integrity We revere honesty. We adhere to the highest ethical standards,
provide timely, accurate and complete financial reporting, encourage
disclosing bad news and welcome disagreement.
Golden Rule We respect all people, value the differences among them and
deal with them in the way we want to be dealt with.This requires us to know
ourselves and to try to understand others.
Objectives We strive to communicate clearly Progressive’s ambitious objec-
tives and our people’s personal and team objectives.We evaluate performance
against all these objectives.
Excellence We strive constantly to improve in order to meet and exceed
the highest expectations of our customers,shareholders and people.We teach
and encourage our people to improve performance and to reduce the
costs of what they do for customers. We base their rewards on results and
promotion on ability.
Proﬁt The opportunity to earn a proﬁt is how the competitive free-enterprise
system motivates investment to enhance human health and happiness.
Expanding proﬁts reﬂect our customers’ and claimants’ increasingly positive
view of Progressive.
- FINANCIAL OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES -
Consistent achievement of superior results requires that our people under-
stand Progressive’s objectives and their speciﬁc roles, and that their personal
objectives dovetail with Progressive’s. Our objectives are ambitious, yet
realistic.We are committed to achieving financial objectives over rolling
ﬁve-year periods. Progressive monitors its ﬁnancial policies continuously
and strives to meet these targets annually. Experience always clariﬁes objec-
tives and illuminates better policies. We constantly evolve as we monitor
the execution of our policies and progress toward achieving our objectives.
Proﬁtability Progressive’s most important goal is for its insurance subsidiaries
to produce an aggregate calendar year % underwriting proﬁt. Our busi-
ness is a composite of many product offerings deﬁned in part by product
type, distribution channel, geography, tenure of the customer and under-
writing grouping. Each of these products has targeted operating parameters
based on level of maturity, underlying cost structures, customer mix and
policy life expectancy. Our aggregate goal is the balanced blend of these
individual performance targets in any calendar year. Overall, we had an
underwriting proﬁt of .% in , and an underwriting proﬁt of .%
for the past ﬁve years and .% for the past ten years. Estimated industry
results for the personal auto insurance market for the same periods were
underwriting gains (losses) of .%, (.)% and (.)%, respectively.
Growth Our goal is to grow as fast as possible, constrained only by our prof-
itability objective and our ability to provide high quality customer service.
Progressive is a growth-oriented company and management incentives
are tied to profitable growth. We report Personal Lines and Commercial
Auto results separately. We further break down our Personal Lines’ results
by channel (Agency and Direct) to give shareholders a clearer picture of
the business dynamics of each distribution method and their respective
rates of growth. Aggregate expense ratios and aggregate growth rates
disguise the true nature and performance of each
business. Personal Lines and Commercial Auto
net premiums written grew % and %, re-
spectively, in . For a further breakdown of
the Agency and Direct results, see Operations
Summary,beginning on page,and Management’s
Discussion and Analysis included in the Company’s
 Annual Report to Shareholders, which is
attached as an Appendix to the Company’s 
Proxy Statement.
Financial Policies Progressive balances risk in
underwriting with risk of investing and ﬁnanc-
ing activities in order to have sufﬁcient capital to
support all the insurance we can proﬁtably under-
write and service.Risks arise in all operational and
functional areas, and therefore must be assessed
holistically,accounting for the offsetting and com-
pounding effects of the separate sources of risk
within the Company.Our ﬁnancial policies deﬁne
our allocation of risk and we measure our per-
formance against them. If, in our view, future
opportunities meet our ﬁnancial objectives and
policies, we will invest capital in expanding
business operations.Any underleveraged capital
will be returned to investors.We expect to earn
a return on equity greater than its cost. Presented
is an overview of Progressive’s Underwriting,
Investing and Financing policies.
I N V E S T I N G
Maintain a liquid,
diversiﬁed, high quality
investment portfolio
> Manage on a total
return basis
> Target an 85% :15%
allocation for ﬁxed
income securities and
common equities
> Manage interest rate,
credit, prepayment and
concentration risk
F I N A N C I N G
Maintain sufﬁcient
capital to support insur-
ance operations
> Maintain debt below
30% of total capital at
book value
> Neutralize dilution
from equity-based
compensation through
share repurchases
> Pay modest, increasing
cash dividends and
split stock when the
share price exceeds
$100 for a reasonable
period of time
U N D E R W R I T I N G
Monitor pricing and
reserving discipline
> Manage proﬁtability
targets and operational
performance at our
lowest level of product
deﬁnition
> Sustain premiums-
to-surplus ratios at
efﬁcient levels, and
below applicable state
regulations, for each
insurance subsidiary
> Ensure loss reserves are
adequate and develop
with minimal variance
- OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES SCORECARD -
Underwriting margin
Net premiums written growth
Companywide premiums-to-surplus ratio
Investment allocation–ﬁxed:equity
Debt-to-total capital ratio
Return on average shareholders’ equity ()1
Comprehensive 2
TARGET
2003
2002
2001
%
(a)
(b)
%:%
<%
.%
%
.
%:%
%
.%
.%
.%
%
.
%:%
%
.%
.%
.%
%
.
%:%
%
.%
.%
(a)Grow as fast as possible, constrained only by our proﬁtability objective and our ability to provide high quality customer service.
(b)Determined separately for each insurance subsidiary.
1Based on net income.
2Based on comprehensive income. Comprehensive  is consistent with the Company’s policy to manage on a total return basis and better reﬂects growth in share-
holder value. For a reconciliation of net income to comprehensive income and for the components of comprehensive income, see the Company’s Consolidated
Statement of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity and Note10–Other Comprehensive Income, respectively, which can be found in the complete Consolidated Financial State-
ments and Notes included in the Company’s Annual Report to Shareholders, which is attached as an Appendix to the Company’s  Proxy Statement.
- ACHIEVEMENTS -
We are convinced that the best way to maximize shareholder value is to
achieve these financial objectives and policies consistently. A shareholder
who purchased shares of Progressive for $, in our ﬁrst public stock
offering on April,, owned , shares on December ,, with
a market value of $,,, for a .% compounded annual return, com-
pared to the .% return achieved by investors in the Standard & Poor’s 
during the same period. In addition, the shareholder received dividends
of $, in, bringing total dividends received to $, since the
shares were purchased.
In the ten years since December ,, Progressive shareholders have
realized compounded annual returns, including dividend reinvestment, of
.%, compared to.% for the . In the ﬁve years since December ,
, Progressive shareholders’ returns were.%, compared to a negative.%
for the  . In , the returns were .% on Progressive shares and
.% for the .
Over the years, when we have had adequate capital and believed it to be
appropriate, we have repurchased our shares. In addition, as our ﬁnancial
policies state, we will repurchase shares to neutralize the dilution from
equity-based compensation programs. Since , we spent $. billion
repurchasing our shares, at an average cost of $. per share. During ,
we repurchased ,, Common Shares. The total cost to repurchase
these shares was $. million with an average cost of $. per share.
- WHAT WORKED -
Every area of the Company functioned extraordinarily well and our
fundamental strategy of seeking continuous, incremental gains on all
business agendas is working. However, there are some conditions so critical
to attaining the combination of growth and profit we have achieved that
they deserve highlighting.
Improved Claims Quality Claims represent three-quarters of our cost structure.
Maintaining accurate, timely loss settlements becomes an increasing
challenge in the face of rapid growth.We entered  with over ,
recently hired claim representatives and hiring rates continued at a torrid
pace through mid-.We were determined not to allow the quality of
claim handling to deteriorate. Our pricing assumes that future claim
handling quality will be consistent with that which produced historical data.
If future claim handling quality cannot support pricing assumptions, we
simply cannot grow proﬁtably—and for Progressive there is no alternative.
Our appetite for future growth will always be regulated by our most current
assessment of claim handling quality.
During , we hired and trained another , new claims resolution
representatives, refined almost all aspects of our claims experience and,
by our own demanding calibration, improved the handling on our nearly
. million claim features. It was not all clear sailing. Early in the year
we determined that the rate of available growth in Texas had the potential
to outpace our ability to maintain consistent claim quality. Consistent
with our growth objective, grow as fast as possible, constrained only by our proﬁt
objective and our ability to provide high quality service,we constrained growth
in Texas for six months while we deployed additional staff and manage-
ment to ensure the level of quality we expect.The action plan and employee
response was Progressive at its best. We lifted growth restrictions by
mid-year and completed the year with  growth in excess of % in
Texas. I believe it is fair to say, thus far, our insistence on growth with no
give back in quality has been a good bet.
The Product Management System Our product
management system is responsible for achieving
our most important objective,at least a 4% under-
writing profit on all products. Individual product
managers typically manage a product offering
in one or two states (e.g., commercial auto in
Florida, or agency auto in Arizona).These man-
agers receive support from dedicated product
design and pricing groups.In ,we performed
over  rate and program revisions designed
to maintain rate adequacy and reﬂect our best
rating science in the markets we serve.
Their collective actions are impressive:
Agency Auto  out of  states were proﬁtable;
only three of the proﬁtable states did not meet
our proﬁt objective.
Direct Auto All states were profitable; only one
failed to meet our proﬁt objective.
Special Lines (motorcycle, recreation vehicles and
watercraft insurance) Offered in  states, had
two unproﬁtable states and two additional states
not meeting our proﬁtability objective.
Commercial Auto Offered in  states and was
proﬁtable in  states with only one other not
meeting our proﬁtability objective.
In no state was there reason for extra concern. I share this information to
highlight the operating discipline we bring to all products.We never use one
state or product to subsidize another, which is central to the quality of our
results and their ability to be reproduced.
In ,with the advantage of increasing size,we reﬁned the controls used
to evaluate intra-product performance. Our focus on clear goals, execution
at the product manager level, along with continuing advances in rating
and product diagnostics, allow us to feel comfortable with rapid growth.
The responsibilities and challenges in the product manager role that ﬁrst
attracted me to the Company in  are today more complex, analytically
challenging, visible, and I believe, rewarding. This key role at Progressive
allows us to attract and retain talented people who may not otherwise
have chosen the insurance ﬁeld.
Improved Customer Retention The combined growth in Progressive policies
in force over the past three years is%—a lot of new customers. Our goal
to be Consumers’ No. Choice for Auto Insurance demands that we not only
attract new customers, but also that we make it attractive for them to stay.
The economics of growth through retention increases, which fueled part of
our performance,are some of the most compelling in our business model.
Answering the question,“Are customers staying with Progressive longer?”
seems simple. It is not. An apparent increase in retention could represent
selling proportionately more policies to a class of customers more likely
to stay with us. Much like the focus on profitability targets, meaningful
information is only available through analysis at the detail level.We intensely
review retention data and have taken numerous actions to encourage cus-
tomers to stay with us.We can happily conclude that during this cumulative
growth period, the propensity for customers to stay with us has increased.
Recent data suggest the rate of increase from  through the ﬁrst half
 has ﬂattened some, and this issue has our full attention. Understanding
retention behavior, measuring it, and estimating policy life and lifetime
premium at an ever-increasing level of detail and accuracy provides us with
ongoing opportunities for improvements.
- OUR GAME PLAN -
We seek to become Consumers’ No. Choice for
Auto Insurance through creation of a consumer
proposition that is faster, fairer and better than
any competitive offering. As such, Progressive
remains a work in progress. Our history has been
built around a clear focus on our goals, an un-
derstanding of the priority among them and a
determination to improve the auto insurance
experience for customers. The symbolism of a
“To Do List” on the cover of this report conveys
some of the many opportunities yet available to us.
In its simplest form, our business model must
do two important things:
Reduce Costs and Allocate Costs Accurately Our
product-focused business units continue to seek
ways to advance the science of rate making to
get accurate cost-based pricing at the lowest level
our data will support. Sophisticated pricing
allows us to grow quickly while avoiding adverse
selection. Accurate cost allocation within our
Agency and Direct businesses maximize the
advantages of both distribution channels.
In , we made signiﬁcant progress in our
Claims Service Center model,designed to provide
end-to-end resolution for auto physical damage
losses, by opening  new centers for a total of.
I believe these centers are a credit to the organiza-
tion,and have produced some superior outcomes.
There is little question in my mind that these
centers will positively change auto insurance and
our cost structure. We expected and are ﬁnding
beneﬁts from improved efﬁciency, increased
accuracy, reduced rework, improvements in
repair cycle time and greater brand distinction.
There is an interesting relationship between total loss costs and the level
of loss adjustment expense that is difﬁcult to deﬁne accurately. We will be
obsessive about seeking the appropriate balance as we pace our expansion.
More now than ever, we are solving the right problem for consumers—
getting them back to pre-accident condition versus just paying the cost to
repair their car. Our ability to do this will improve with scale.
Our skill in acquiring new customers is not yet matched by an equivalent
intensity around designing policies to best meet customers’ evolving needs.
We recognize well the economic leverage of further retention improvements
and perhaps more importantly the negative brand costs of any failure to meet
customer expectations. Competitive prices are a necessary condition but
alone are not sufﬁcient to achieve the retention levels we believe are possible.
We are committed to understanding the subtleties of this opportunity.
Our growing number of Progressive employee customers (myself included)
are, with my encouragement, becoming our toughest critics on product
and service details that could enhance the customer experience.We aspire to
be recognized as the preeminent consumer franchise in auto insurance
and understand this requires an extraordinary commitment to service
delivery. Our surveys all show improving customer service, but valid com-
plaints and certain survey data tell us our task is still far from done.We have
committed a significant amount of talent and resources to improving all
of our customer contacts.
I have often described Progressive as a technology company in the auto
insurance business. Much of what we have achieved has been made possible
by our talented information technology staff, and we certainly would not
have been able to support our growth without extraordinary commitment
to our technology capacity and capabilities.We see the future with our agents
being very dependent on technology and are developing applications that
allow us and our agents to do more, easier and at less cost.We are placing
equal emphasis on infrastructure platforms to maintain strategic or cost
advantages. For example, we are months away from replacing a billing
system that does not provide the ﬂexibility we need in today’s world of bill
payment options.Within , our claims group will deploy new technol-
ogy that better reﬂects the process and workﬂow of our claims handling.
Our continuous investment in technology over the past several years has
positioned us well to remain a leader in technology solutions for service
delivery to both our customers and agents, and we are committed to a level
of technology investment that ensures we never constrain the business.
TACTICAL AGENDA
Quality Improvement
Recruiting and Training
Efﬁcient Stafﬁng
Specialty Roles
Claims Technology
Drive down the curve
Move the curve
LOSS ADJUSTMENT EXPENSE (LAE)
E
A
L
+
S
T
S
O
C
S
S
O
L
L
A
T
O
T
STRATEGIC AGENDA
Change the Process–
Claims Service Centers Model
Redeﬁne “Indemnity”
Leverage Scale
Improve Cycle Time
Increase Accuracy
- MARKET CONDITIONS -
- CAPITAL MANAGEMENT -
Our investment and capital management strategy
remains squarely focused on ensuring insurance
operations have sufficient capital to support
all the insurance we can proﬁtably underwrite
and service.We ended  with $. billion in
invested assets, up from $. billion in Decem-
ber . On the same basis, shareholders’ equity
was $ billion,up from $. billion.
We revised two Financial Policies this year.
We restated our position on ﬁnancial leverage
to maintain debt below% of total capital,rather
than between% and %.With a January 
repayment of $ million of maturing debt and
strong cash ﬂow from operations, our debt level
will soon drop below our previously established
% ﬂoor. We believe we have sufﬁcient capital
to support our anticipated immediate growth.
We will begin a process into slowly increase
operating leverage through higher premiums-to-
surplus ratios in our agency,direct and commercial
insurance subsidiaries where permitted. We are
more skilled at underwriting and believe the trade
off between lower ﬁnancial leverage and increased
operating leverage will lead to more efﬁcient cap-
ital usage with less risk.We will revise our policy
from a simple :premiums-to-surplus ratio in
favor of sustaining the ratio at efﬁcient levels and
below applicable state regulations.
Throughout the year, we reafﬁrmed our posi-
tion that we would repurchase shares when our
capital position,view of the future and the stock’s
price make it attractive to do so. We also repur-
chase shares to neutralize the dilution from stock
options exercised since, and restricted stock
issued, which replaced the use of non-qualiﬁed
stock options for long-term compensation of
senior management beginning in.During the
year, we repurchased  million shares and ended
the year with . million shares outstanding
as compared with . million at year-end.
Market conditions evolved dramatically in . Competitors enjoyed the
beneﬁts of reduced frequency and generally improved pricing. We expect
the  industry-wide combined ratio for personal auto will be less than
% —the second time in  years. We cannot predict future accident
frequency rates, just as we failed to predict the extent to which frequency has
fallen. However, the outlook appears generally favorable and accident severity
is well in check. Given this scenario, we expect the advantages we have
enjoyed due to our early positioning and rate adequacy will diminish to some
degree. Nevertheless, we believe we are well positioned to advance our game
plan and grow at several times the industry growth rate. Our strong margins
will allow us to focus on retaining customers and to introduce new product
improvements faster. Our business goals remain the same and over time we
expect to see our underwriting margins moving closer to our planned %.
Our focus remains on auto insurance and striving to be the best auto
insurance choice for all consumers.
We believe the .. personal auto insurance market will continue to
consolidate with the top or  players growing at the expense of smaller
players. Success in the auto sector will increasingly require scale and superior
execution in information technology,pricing segmentation,claims handling
and brand development.Progressive,the #writer of auto insurance through
independent agencies, the # direct writer and # overall, is well positioned
to execute on these requirements for success, allowing us to build sustainable
margin advantages over many competitors and to reduce our exposure to
the amplitude of industry proﬁt and growth cyclicality.
PRIVATE PASSENGER
AUTO RANKINGS
Market Share
1 State Farm
2 Allstate
3 Progressive
4 GEICO
5 Nationwide
6 USAA
7 Farmers/Zurich
8 Liberty Mutual
9 AIG
20.1%
11.4%
7.0%
5.4%
4.6%
3.8%
3.8%
2.5%
2.4%
10 American Family 2.1%
Based  on  estimated  2003  net
premiums written.
PRIVATE PASSENGER
AUTO RANKINGS
(For Illustrative Purposes Only)
Market Share
1 State Farm
20.1%
2 Allstate
11.4%
3 GEICO 1
5.4%
4 Progressive - Agency 4.8%
5 Nationwide
4.6%
6 USAA1
3.8%
7 Farmers/Zurich
3.8%
8 Liberty Mutual
2.5%
2.4%
9 AIG
10 Progressive - Direct 2.2%
Presents rankings if Progressive’s
Agency and Direct businesses were
reported separately.
1Classiﬁed as direct writers
- EXPANDED SCOPE AND FREQUENCY OF DISCLOSURE -
Our reporting of results monthly is the norm for us and we continuously
strive to enhance the quality of the communication. During the course of
,we enhanced our monthly reporting by including investment income,
net income and earnings per share ﬁgures. In addition, we included a con-
densed  balance sheet, monthly share repurchase activity and the fully
taxable equivalent total return on investments.We expect our monthly releases
to supplant the importance of quarterly reports in.We will offer brief
management analyses each month to anticipate owners’and analysts’questions.
- PROGRESSIVE TODAY AND TOMORROW -
From one perspective, Progressive has changed significantly from only
a few years ago: new products, new means of distribution, new services,
new facilities, and many new faces—there are now over , Progressive
people.What hasn’t changed are our objectives and values. In,then 
and now Chairman, Peter Lewis wrote “There is a simpler, easier way—but it’s
not the Progressive way. Our way is not easy and we may even be crazy—but we are
going to do it and we will be proud.” Today, as then, our culture is deﬁned by
people who enjoy working hard, growing constantly, performing well
and being rewarded competitively. Our objectives are demanding and hard
to achieve, and our organization is proud when we do so.
This year was special in so many ways, but for some, the highlight
was surpassing the $ billion premium milestone, an event that seemed
so Herculean when ﬁrst targeted in the earlys.We celebrated company-
wide and quickly resumed work on the next items on our list. As good
as  was, I look forward to  and continuing to build toward our
aspiration of being Consumers’ No. Choice for Auto Insurance.
We deeply appreciate the customers we are privileged to serve, the
Progressive people who serve them, the agents who choose to represent
us and the shareholders who believe in what we are doing.
Glenn M. Renwick
President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer
In addition,our special lines insurance products,primarily motorcycles,motor
homes and watercraft, had another tremendous year, with policies in force
growing %. Our broad-based distribution strategy (over, independent
insurance agencies appointed across the country) helps ensure that these
niche products continue to thrive.Technology and service strategies parallel
to auto makes using these products an easy choice for our agents.
``
2003
2002
CHANGE
(in billions)
Net Premiums Written
Net Premiums Earned
Loss and loss adjustment
expense ratio
Underwriting expense ratio
Auto Policies in Force (in thousands)
$ .
$ .
.
.
.
,
$ .
$ .
.
.
.
,
%
%
. pts.
. pts.
. pts.
%
- AGENCY -
Progressive’s Agency operations enjoyed positive
results in . We were able to strengthen our
position as the nation’s largest writer of private
passenger auto insurance through independent
agents by growing% to$.billion.Our Agency
business now represents slightly less than% of
the .. personal auto insurance market.
Despite the gradual softening of the market
through the year, new application growth was
healthy, helping to drive auto policies in force
up%. Our drop in loss ratio reﬂects favorable
loss trends for the year, particularly in frequency.
Our expense ratio continues to be a competitive
advantage relative to our Agency competitors.
The Agency business invested in technology im-
provements, enabling agents easily and quickly to
service their customers online, and introduced a
Web-based quoting platform.We improved phone
service by creating a customer services team
devoted exclusively to serving agents.We believe
that our systems,coupled with the service provided
by our claims and customer services groups,
give us a distinct advantage in acquiring agents’
business.We try to make it easy and efﬁcient for
agents to meet the demands of their customers.
Internal and external survey data suggest that
agents are aware of our strengths in service and
technology and that it is an important factor in
deciding whether to place business with us.
- DIRECT -
Progressive’s Direct operations had a good,
growing % to $. billion.The Direct business
represents about % of the .. personal auto
insurance market.
Our advertising continues to differentiate
our brand by helping consumers better under-
stand our focus on making car insurance easier.
We increased our ad spending during the year
as we attempted to broaden the reach of our
messages while maintaining a strong presence
in an increasingly crowded advertising space.
Through continued analysis, we improved our
media buying with the objective of optimizing
our advertising dollars.
We also made our cost accounting even stronger,
placing particular emphasis on how we measure
the amount we will spend to acquire a customer,
better understanding acquisition spend by chan-
nel, tier and medium, and forecasting how long
we need to retain a customer in order to recover
our ﬁxed costs.We continued to reﬁne our pric-
ing to provide the most accurate prices possible.
- COMMERCIAL AUTO -
Commercial Auto had another strong year,
solidifying our position as the third largest com-
mercial auto carrier.Written premiums grew%
to $. billion, representing about % of the ..
commercial auto insurance market.Competitors’
rate actions moderated in after double digit
increases the previous two years. However, as
other carriers took actions to return their general
liability and workers’compensation lines to proﬁt-
ability,many customer groups we serve were forced
to shop for new auto coverage. This supported a
% increase in new applications for the year and
a% growth in policies. Like personal auto, the
commercial business beneﬁted from favorable loss
frequency trends.These loss trends, coupled with
rate actions we took in,resulted in an eight
point improvement in the loss/ ratio.
During the year, we made significant invest-
ments in systems to mirror the technology and
service strategies of Personal Lines. Following
parallel technology and service strategies aligns
We invested further in developing a superior experience for our customers.
A new customer can now beneﬁt from more rate comparisons, faster quotes,
a report that details how personal credit information affects prices (where
applicable) and more counseling on coverages, limits and deductibles.
We are pleased with improvements in important measures such as
sales conversion, early term retention, and customers’ use of the Internet
and electronic payments.
Net Premiums Written
Net Premiums Earned
Loss and loss adjustment
expense ratio
Underwriting expense ratio
Auto Policies in Force (in thousands)
(in billions)
2003
2002
CHANGE
$ .
$ .
.
.
.
,
$ .
$ .
.
.
.
,
%
%
. pts.
. pts.
. pts.
%
us with emerging standardized work flow within most agents’ offices,
making it much easier and more cost effective for agents to sell and service
the small business owner who is a Progressive Commercial Auto customer.
Progressive has twice as many commercial customers now than at the end
of .This information has allowed us to reﬁne underwriting and enhance
coverages for key product groups.We are also mining this larger data set to
improve our product model and price segmentation. Introducing these
changes throughout  and into  should support moderate, but
continued growth of our commercial business.
Net Premiums Written
Net Premiums Earned
Loss and loss adjustment
expense ratio
Underwriting expense ratio
Auto Policies in Force (in thousands)
(in billions)
2003
2002
CHANGE
$ .
$ .
.
.
.

$ .
.
$
.
.
.

%
%
. pts.
. pts.
. pts.
%
We feel well positioned for the coming year. With the interest rates low
on all fixed income sectors, we continue to like our short duration, high
quality investment strategy. We continue to believe that the underwriting
business remains the most attractive place to invest our capital.
Fully taxable equivalent total return:
Fixed income securities
Common stocks
Total portfolio
Duration of ﬁxed income securities
Weighted average credit quality
2003
2002
.%
.%
.%
. years

.%
(.)%
.%
. years

- INVESTMENT OPERATIONS -
The investment environment in  was more
favorable than in .We are pleased with our
results on both an absolute basis and relative to
our expectations at the start of the year. The
economy improved, resulting in stronger valua-
tions for stocks, modestly higher ..Treasury
yields and generally lower risk premiums for
non-..Treasury bonds.We maintained our asset
allocation discipline of investing approximately
% of our portfolio in equities and % in ﬁxed
income securities.Both asset classes produced pos-
itive total returns,with stocks rebounding sharply.
We kept our exposure to interest rate risk low and
our credit quality high. During the year, our ﬁxed
income portfolio duration ranged from just under
 years to . years at the end of  and our
weighted average credit rating ranged from  to
+. Substantial cash flow from operations and
positive investment returns contributed to strong
portfolio growth.We have increased the rigor of
our portfolio analytics and plan to upgrade our
ability to measure portfolio exposures.
- CEO AND CFO CERTIFICATIONS -
Glenn M. Renwick, President and Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of The Progres-
sive Corporation, and W. Thomas Forrester, Vice President and Chief
Financial Ofﬁcer of The Progressive Corporation, have issued the certiﬁca-
tions required by Sections  and  of The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 
and applicable  regulations with respect to the Company’s Annual Report
on Form-, including the ﬁnancial statements provided in this Report
and in the  Annual Report to Shareholders, which is attached as an
Appendix in the Company’s  Proxy Statement. Among other matters
required to be included in those certiﬁcations,Mr.Renwick and Mr.Forrester
have each certified that, to the best of his knowledge, the financial state-
ments, and other ﬁnancial information included in the Annual Report on
Form -, fairly present in all material respects the financial condition,
results of operations and cash flows of the Company as of, and for, the
periods presented. See Exhibits and  to the Company’s Annual Report on
Form- for the complete Section  and  Certiﬁcations, respectively.
- REPORT OF PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP,
INDEPENDENT AUDITORS -
To  the  Board  of  Directors  and  Shareholders,  The  Progressive  Corporation:
We have audited, in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted
in the United States of America, the consolidated ﬁnancial statements of
The Progressive Corporation as of December , and , and for each
of the three years in the period ended December ,, appearing in The
Progressive Corporation’s Annual Report, which is attached as an
Appendix to The Progressive Corporation’s  Proxy Statement (which
statements are not presented herein); and in our report dated January ,
, we expressed an unqualiﬁed opinion on those consolidated ﬁnancial
statements. In our opinion, the information set forth in the accompanying
condensed consolidated balance sheets as of December , and 