Few in the insurance industry would describe the third quarter of 2005 with “business as usual”
commentary.  Katrina, and to a lesser degree Rita, are replacing our memory of the names of the four
dominant storms from the third quarter of 2004 and recalibrating the extent of loss possible from such
natural disasters.  Such is the case for Progressive, but the quarter was also highlighted by our entry into
a large state, continued favorable development of loss reserves against our prior expectations and solid,
if not robust, growth.
Third quarter shopping activity continued to reflect “soft market conditions” with prices subject to more
downward movement than increases.  Quarterly growth of 5% on net premiums written and 6% on net
premiums earned was slightly slower than the year-to-date rates of 7% for both, signaling some
continued slowing.  Our year-over-year premium per application was down about 5% for our Drive®
branded auto products and 2% for Progressive DirectSM products.
Policies in force is my preferred measure of growth, since it eliminates premium trends.  Year-to-date,
our Personal Lines policies in force increased 10% (allocated between Drive auto at 6%, Direct auto at
12% and our special lines products at 14%) and were down slightly from the comparable second quarter
number of 11%.  Similarly, our Commercial Auto increase in policies in force was 12%, down from
13% in the second quarter 2005.  While we remain well prepared for additional growth, these results met
our expectations relative to the market.  Perhaps the most notable commentary on growth continues to
be the relative strength of Internet-initiated business for Progressive Direct.  In May, we provided ranges
for our new customer mix indicating 50% to 55% of our Direct business was Internet initiated versus
phone and of those about 60% to 65% completed their sale on the Internet without transferring to a call
center.  We have now seen these ranges increase by about 5%.
Profitability for the quarter was strong almost belying the included catastrophes.  The combined ratio of
90.4 had several moving parts.  First, we continued to experience favorable frequency and even some
reduced claims activity throughout the country in the week or so following Hurricane Katrina.  Second,
we incurred the addition of the hurricane losses for both Katrina and Rita.  And third, we recognized a
continuation of “favorable” development of prior-year reserving.  The $93.9 million of favorable
development during the quarter reflects the lower than estimated claim severity recognized on closed
claims as well as the application of that lower than estimated severity to those claims yet to be resolved.
While industry terminology uses the terms favorable and unfavorable to reflect net contribution to the
income statement, we never view significant reserve changes as “favorable” and strive to be accurate at
2
all times.  We will continue to monitor both frequency and severity very closely and, if not perfect at
prediction, we expect to quickly reflect observations as they develop.  We encourage readers of our
monthly financials to focus on the accident year loss/LAE ratio as the best indicator of current
performance.
Katrina was big in every sense.  For Progressive, through the end of October, this translated into nearly
30,000 claim reports, and over 24,000 incurred claims, over 300,000 forms and pieces of mail, over
400,000 telephone calls, deployment of over 1,300 claims representatives and an expected loss of $185
million, approximately 5 ½ times our previous single highest claims event.  Our claims organization has
been, and continues to be, a source of pride for Progressive and we believe our response to Katrina will
further our reputation in both responsiveness and quality of claims resolution.  We have every reason to
believe that few, if any, companies responded as quickly or as comprehensively as Progressive.  As of
the end of October, we have resolved over 90% of all Hurricane Katrina claims.  As part of the decision
making associated with the storm, we concluded that cars significantly exposed to the contaminated
flood waters of Orleans and St. Bernard parishes and declared total losses by us should not find their
way back into the marketplace.  As a result, we have been having these vehicles crushed, shredded and,
where possible, recycled.  In the end, we expect to crush over 5,000 vehicles.
September 30 was the first day we offered personal auto insurance through Drive Insurance from
Progressive and Progressive Direct to New Jersey consumers.  On Monday, October 3, Acting Governor
Richard J. Codey “officially” welcomed the entry of both brands to the state.  Viewed individually, each
of our brands is in the top ten of all auto writers in the country.  Our path to reentry into New Jersey has
been long, and often difficult, but we are very happy to be writing there.  Our plans are to introduce our
Commercial Auto products later this year and motorcycle and boat products in 2006.
In summary - an eventful quarter with very respectable results.  With Wilma highlighting the early
fourth quarter, all eyes will continue to be on our response and that of the industry.
Glenn M. Renwick
President and Chief Executive Officer
3
The Progressive Corporation and Subsidiaries
