What a difference a year makes--after reporting unacceptable results last year,
we are pleased to report record operating income of $485.5 million in 2001. More
importantly, we've made substantial progress on every front toward making
Progressive consumers' #1 choice for auto insurance. In last year's letter,
Chairman and long-time CEO Peter Lewis reflected on his experience with past
insurance cycles:
"Increasing rates before competitors do slows growth and causes our competitors
to grow faster. While not growing, we fix the processing problems that always
arise during previous periods of fast growth and change. Some competitors grow
faster while both their underwriting results and customer service deteriorate.
Then competitors finally raise rates and restrict acceptances to stem their
losses. When this has happened, because Progressive's rates had been adequate
and our operations were running smoothly, we grew, usually quite profitably. We
will soon learn whether this long-time dynamic still operates."
The first phase of this market dynamic appears to be playing out as expected.
During 2001, we closely monitored our rates and continued to demand rate
adequacy in every market and product. Our focus was on restoring operating
margin. While the growth in policies in force was less than we would have liked,
we ended 2001 with an underwriting margin of 4.8%, in line with our most
important goal of a 4% underwriting profit. By year end, we were reporting
stronger growth rates and if this trend continues, we look forward to, and feel
prepared for, the second phase of the cycle--profitable growth.
The merit of Progressive's focused business vision became
Focus             increasingly clearer to me since becoming CEO two years ago.
You can expect Progressive to maintain an almost fanatical
focus on auto insurance. We systematically eliminated other
than core businesses and business arrangements that were
inconsistent with our focus and/or distracting management
attention. The U.S. personal auto insurance market is huge and
while our share is substantial enough to count, it is small
enough to offer us growth opportunities over the next decade
to allow us to be a multiple of our current size. We take
considerable pride in understanding our business and applying
the collective energy of our 20,000+ people to perform every
operation of auto insurance extraordinarily well. We have an
intense curiosity to probe for opportunities to improve
customer service and reduce cost because consumers deserve and
demand it.
This year, we added a fourth element to the existing
Customer          foundation of Vision, Values and Objectives--the Customer
Value             Value Proposition. The Customer Value Proposition provides a
Proposition       litmus test for customer interactions, relationships and
innovation.
FAST, FAIR, BETTER That's what you can expect from Progressive. Everything we do
recognizes the needs of busy consumers who are cost-conscious, increasingly
savvy about insurance and ready for easy, new ways to quote, buy and manage
their policies, including claims service that respects their time and reduces
the trauma and inconvenience of loss.
I expect this proposition will give added meaning to our brand line of "Not what
you'd expect from an insurance company--well, maybe you should."
In May, we began public reporting of our monthly underwriting
Open              results. We had some misgiving about becoming the first, and
Disclosure        so far only, public company to report monthly. I'm happy with
the decision to go forward, and can report nothing but
positive outcomes with our owners and interested parties, who
now receive more information sooner about our results. We
separately reported Personal Lines results for our two
distribution channels, Agent and Direct, during all of 2001.
Our loss reserving practices continue to evolve and improve as
we seek ways to be as confident as possible about reserve
adequacy. In June, we published a very open report on how
Progressive establishes and evaluates claim reserves. These
are but two actions that exemplify Progressive's Values and
are consistent with our consumer brand to be open and candid.
art here
Long-term observers of Progressive's business model will note
Our Evolving      a dramatic change over the past ten years from a company with
Business Model    a single distribution channel (independent agencies),
primarily variable acquisition costs (agent commission),
narrowly-focused product (nonstandard auto), poor customer
retention, and low liability limits to a multi-channel company
(independent agencies and direct, via both the telephone and
Internet) with a mixed acquisition cost model, product
availability for all drivers, a focus on policyholder
retention, and liability limit mixes reflective of the general
market.
The inclusion of the direct acquisition channel, with its substantial up-front
costs, is the most dramatic change, but each change has significant and
important implications for achieving our goals. The diversity of channel and
product gives Progressive an unlimited ability to meet the needs of consumers
shopping for auto insurance. However, each business area must meet very specific
and different profitability targets, so that the balanced blend meets our 4%
underwriting profit goal. Attempts to change the goals to reflect the new
business opportunities in 1998 led us to suboptimal decisions. In 2000, we
decided the business model must fit our goals, and during 2001, we have become
even clearer in the determination of individual product targets.
Progressive's Personal Lines earned premium increased 11% to
Insurance         $6.5 billion for 2001, with a 4% increase in auto policies in
Operations        force and a GAAP combined ratio of 95.5. In 2000, we made
organizational changes that allow us to understand and advance
each of our two distribution systems--independent agents and
direct to the consumer; 2001 marks the first full year of
operating with these changes. I am very pleased to report that
this structure has produced the desired focus within channel,
and enhanced opportunities for leveraging technology and
increased brand opportunities for our agents and business
partners. We strive to provide the best product possible in
each channel, allowing consumers to choose how they do
business with us.
AGENT OPERATIONS The Agent business produced earned premium of $4.7 billion, up
1% over 2000, with a 1% decrease in auto policies in force. The discipline to
improve operating margin and get to rate adequacy came at the expected cost of
low unit growth. The 94.7 combined ratio for the business was remarkable and the
largest part of our profit turnaround. The decline in policies in force was more
pronounced in the early part of the year, with substantial recovery as
competitors began taking rates up, started becoming more restrictive or even
withdrawing. We achieved a profitable year in nine of our top ten states, while
experiencing significant challenges in New York, Florida, California, Georgia
and Louisiana.
Our strategy of technology leadership in the Agent business, much of it
leveraging the Internet, advanced nicely during the year. Notable achievements
include close to full implementation of our paper-free relationship strategy
with agents in several states, an increasing number of policy endorsements
performed online by the agent versus Progressive's Policy Services group, a
substantial number of policies completely underwritten at the point of sale with
all underwriting data validation checks performed and a growing number of
policyholders electing an installment plan choosing electronic funds transfer.
We work closely with agent advisors in defining our agent technology strategy,
and share with them a goal to have technology be a significant driver of lower
overall cost and increased flexibility for product changes. Our attention will
remain focused in this area.
DIRECT OPERATIONS The important objective in 2001 was for the Direct business to
record a combined ratio under 100. With a substantial book of renewal customers,
sufficient scale in call center operations and media buying, and a substantial
and growing brand awareness, the business has matured such that calendar year
profitability is now expected. The Direct business produced earned premium of
$1.8 billion, up 46% over 2000, and increased auto policies in force by 18%. The
97.7 combined ratio, which was 12.8 points better than last year, and the
continued improvement in expense ratio to 25.9 for 2001 are extremely
encouraging.
During the year, we introduced a new advertising campaign we call "High
Expectations," providing examples in noninsurance encounters of the high
expectations that Progressive customers have come to expect as a result of doing
business with us. The advertising successfully generated an increasing number of
calls and online quotes. We expense all advertising costs as incurred and do not
defer either the development costs of new creatives or the media placements. Our
net investment in establishing this business over the last eight years has been
fully accounted for in operating results. We look forward to significant
contributions to profitable growth.
Our Internet quoting, buying and servicing capabilities continue to lead the
industry and gain favor with consumers. We believe our success with the Internet
business model was a function of great technology, supported by established call
centers for those consumers who start their experience on the Web and wish to
finish with an in-person consultation. Predictably, more consumers are becoming
more comfortable with the Internet for a variety of products and we see
increasing usage for all insurance transactions. We are designing our newer
innovations with the next generation of buyer in mind and it is clear the next
generation is markedly different in their use and expectations of Web-delivered
products. We are very pleased and see tremendous potential in this arena.
art here
We aspire to be recognized as the preeminent consumer
Commitment        franchise in auto insurance, and understand that this requires
to Service        an extraordinary commitment to creating new levels of service
expectations. During 2001, we made significant strides in
defining and advancing the concept of making every consumer
interaction Virtually Perfect. In a business that must manage
accuracy of pricing, validity of information and collection of
funds before provision of coverage, while continuously
reducing costs, this standard of care is a true challenge.
From the consumer perspective, service is all about ease of
doing business. We adopted three new and important operating
strategies by which to advance our thinking toward this goal.
ELECTRONIC TRANSACTIONS FOR EVERYTHING Imagine you were in Houston after
Tropical Storm Allison hit in June 2001, and you got an e-mail from Progressive
saying, "We hope things are OK, but based on your location and flood patterns,
we expect you may have had a loss." The e-mail included claim reporting
information and some helpful tips for avoiding damage to your car in flood
conditions. Progressive sent almost 4,100 e-mails and paid over 6,000
weather-related claims last June in Texas, in our single greatest catastrophe
loss ever. Almost 50% of our claims were settled in three weeks and 90% were
settled in 50 days. Many people who were safe from harm e-mailed back to say,
"Thanks for asking about us!" Not what you'd expect from an insurance
company--well, we think you should.
END-TO-END DESIGN Suppose you report an accident at nine o'clock on Sunday
night. Your car is damaged, but drivable and nobody is hurt. Now what happens?
You are offered Immediate Response(R) claims service, the opportunity to choose
your own repair shop or, in several locations, a new alternative we are testing.
Imagine this...You're asked, "When would it be convenient for you to drop your
car off--perhaps 7 a.m. tomorrow on your way to work?" We will transfer your
personal items, including that often forgotten garage door opener, to your
courtesy car, which is there waiting for you. You carry on, business as usual,
while we arrange and oversee the repairs of your vehicle until the beeper we
provide you alerts you your car is ready for pick up. When you return, we will
go over the repairs made by the selected body shop with you and, when satisfied,
you pay your deductible and leave with a guarantee on the work for as long as
you own the vehicle. Total elapsed time--as fast as possible, because we select
a qualified shop that's ready to start work immediately. Total commitment of
your time -- less than 20 minutes, plus drive time, because we follow your car
until it's repaired to our satisfaction--and yours. Not only do we think it's a
great new way to handle vehicle damage claims, but so do over 10,000 consumers
who have been involved in our testing. We plan expansion when we have achieved
specific prototype acceptance criteria. Not what you'd expect from an insurance
company -- well, maybe you should.
CUSTOMER RETENTION I've challenged Progressive people to take the loss of a
Progressive customer personally. We've created a level of self criticism that
demands change to existing procedures and reorientation to customer-centric
training and measurement. Many things have changed and will continue to change
as a result. We can now measure the retention impact of alternative claims
handling solutions. If a customer requests policy cancellation, we are now
probing much more deeply into the reasons for their decision with the hope of
providing alternative solutions. We predict events that may result in policy
cancellations in order to anticipate customer needs. The list of opportunities
is long and detailed, reflecting a growing culture of customer preservation and
detailed analysis of reasons for customer loss.
Progressive's
Financial Policies
[CHART HERE]
*UNDERWRITING Risk-Failure to grow earned premium and earn a 96 combined ratio
Policies-A. Pursue short-tailed, high-frequency, low-severity opportunities B.
Use multiple insurance companies to maintain flexibility C. Establish growth and
profitability targets by term and channel D. Set rates that reflect claim costs,
acquisition costs and retention E. Ensure loss reserves are adequate and develop
with minimal variance
*INVESTING Risk-Failure to maintain portfolio liquidity and build
wealth Policies-A. Diversify portfolio with liquid asset classes B. Use fixed
income to cover operating liabilities and contingencies C. Use risk assets to
build wealth D. Manage interest rate, default, prepayment and concentration
risk E. Recognize capital gains and losses to promote tax efficiency
*FINANCING Risk-Failure to pay obligations and earn our cost of equity capital
Policies-A. Keep premium-to-surplus below 3:1 for each insurance company B.
Maintain debt between 20% and 30% of total capital at book value C. Pay modest,
increasing cash dividends to shareholders D. Split stock to maintain target
$50 share price if price exceeds $100 E. Neutralize dilution from stock options
with periodic share repurchases
Progressive chooses to take risk in and expects commensurate
Capital             returns from underwriting auto insurance. Thus, the primary
Management and      objective of capital management is always to have sufficient
Investments         capital to support all the insurance we can profitably
underwrite and service. During 2001, we undertook a
comprehensive review of all our capital and investing
policies, essentially asking whether they are all congruent
with our objectives and with one another. This extensive and
detailed process resulted in a deeper understanding of all
interrelated components of our business model. The summary
on the preceding page provides a high-level overview of
Progressive's Underwriting, Investing and Financing
policies. Continually challenging our every action for
relevance and congruence is an important and ongoing capital
management function.
We ended 2001 with an $8.2 billion investment portfolio, up from $7.0 billion
last December. Our portfolio size grew due to strong cash flows from operations
and proceeds from a $350 million debt issuance in December 2001. We constrain
our use of capital by requiring ourselves to produce an excellent return on it.
Our return on average shareholders' equity was 13.5% for the year and 12.6% over
the past five years. Similar to our review of the underwriting business, our
review of investing practices has led us to eliminate certain investment
practices and change others. Our asset allocation at year end was 84% fixed
income, managed largely by Progressive Capital Management, and 16% common stock,
largely managed to track the Russell 1000 index. We achieved a 5.9%
fully-taxable equivalent total return for the year.
We stated last year that we would repurchase shares when our capital position,
view of the future and the stock's price make it attractive to do so. During the
year, we repurchased 932,234 shares and ended the year with 73.4 million shares
outstanding versus 73.5 million last year.
art here
PROGRESSIVE IS SPECIAL because our objectives are demanding and hard to achieve,
particularly all of them every year, and we aspire to ever increasing levels of
performance.
To become consumers' #1 choice in auto insurance requires people who enjoy
working hard, growing constantly, performing well and being rewarded
competitively in an environment of ever-improving business skills and science
with superior technology implementation and a genuine desire to create a better
consumer proposition. As we start 2002, I am proud to report this is my
assessment of the 20,442 Progressive people who make our future brighter than
ever.
We deeply appreciate the customers we are privileged to serve. Thank you for
your business. Thanks to the agents and service representatives in the more than
30,000 Independent Insurance Agencies who did business with Progressive in 2001.
We are grateful for our shareholders' continued confidence. To the men and women
who make Progressive a great company, thanks for all you do each day and for all
we have accomplished together in 2001.
/s/Glenn M. Renwick
Glenn M. Renwick
President and Chief Executive Officer
