--------------------------
Progressive--Auto Insurer for All People
-------------------------------------------
In 1994, we made great strides toward repositioning Progressive to offer
automobile insurance to all U.S. licensed operators through independent
insurance agents and other distribution methods. This customer-driven approach
is increasing our rate of growth and market share, which, in turn, lets us
reduce the costs of doing business and become still more competitive.
We are building intrinsic value in the form of a growing customer base, and a
broad array of products and services delivered when and how customers most want
them. Progressive's people are responding superbly to the challenge of managing
explosive growth, reaffirming how good they are, as well as the strength of
Progressive's Vision, Values and Strategy.
We grew in 1994 by increasing our share of the approximately $20 billion
nonstandard auto insurance market and by beginning to grow in the approximately
$80 billion standard and preferred auto insurance market. We work hard and
invest heavily in people and processes to reduce the human trauma and economic
costs of auto accidents. Our results include the cost of these investments
designed to make us more competitive for all auto insurance.
Progressive shareholders are best served by executing meaningful, long-term
strategies. Success requires translating premium growth into commensurate
earnings growth, so our stock price reflects the intrinsic value we are now
creating.
From its beginnings, Progressive's most important competitive advantage has
been having superior people, measured by their intelligence, work ethic,
ambition, creativity and demonstrated performance. Many companies pay lip
service to this idea. At Progressive, it is a way of life. Our people's
teamwork and esprit has never been higher. Our performance-based Gainsharing
compensation lets them enjoy the benefits of competitive and productivity
improvements so long as they continue to meet or exceed the Company's ambitious
objectives.
Progressive's evolution accelerated greatly six years ago, when Proposition 103
in California forced us to understand consumer discontent with auto insurance
at the same time that Allstate's success in nonstandard auto insurance forced
us to respond to consumer demand for lower prices and improved service.
These events led us to redefine Progressive as a consumer-focused auto insurer
offering all auto owners and operators vastly better service at lower cost. We
must continue to spend less to run our enterprise, even as we work hard and
creatively to enhance our customers' and agents' experience of doing business
with Progressive.
Future growth will come from adding to the number of states where we seek to
insure all auto risks, from working with the independent agents dedicated to
regaining market share and from integrating other buying options into a
consumer-focused, brand experience in ways that attract customers and support
the forward-looking agents who will succeed in the 21st century.
When we were a nonstandard auto insurer experimenting with commercial
insurance, Progressive was compared to other specialty property-casualty
insurers dealing in secondary markets. The new Progressive seeks to write all
auto risks, and to be continuously less involved in non-auto commercial
insurance. We are now the 7th largest U.S. private passenger auto insurer with
2.2 percent market share, surpassed only by State Farm Mutual, Allstate,
Farmers Group, USAA, Nationwide and GEICO, which, along with Safeco, are the
companies to which we compare ourselves.
21
[ARTWORK]
22
18
An
opportunity
to see
and solve problems
from a wider variety
of
perspectives.
Results
-----------
Operating income, which excludes realized gains on security sales and one-time
items, is the best measure of how well we perform in our operations. Operating
income increased to $212.7 million, or $2.76 per share, compared to $197.3
million, or $2.61 per share, in 1993.  Operating income excludes the $71.0
million elimination of the supplemental reserve and realized gains of $23.8
million in 1994 and $107.9 million of realized gains, primarily from the sale
of equity securities, in 1993. Net income increased 3 percent to $274.3
million, or $3.59 per share, in 1994, compared to $267.3 million, or $3.58 per
share, in 1993. Return on shareholders' equity was 27.4 percent, compared to
36.0 percent in 1993.
We have historically established case and IBNR reserves by product, with the
objective of being accurate to within +/-2 percent. Pricing has been based
only on case and IBNR reserves, which have historically been redundant. To give
ourselves an even higher level of comfort about loss reserve adequacy, we had
set our aggregate reserves near the upper end of the reasonable range of total
reserve estimates. We called the difference between total reserves and the sum
of our case and IBNR reserves a "supplemental reserve." In 1994, we eliminated
the $71.0 million supplemental reserve because it made our estimates of total
reserves excessively conservative and was out of step with industry practices.
The effects of the elimination were a one-time 1994 earnings increase of $.62
per share, a 3.2 percentage point improvement in the underwriting profit margin
and a $46.2 million addition to capital.
Net premiums written increased 35 percent to $2,457.2 million, compared to
$1,819.2 million in 1993. We achieved an 8.3 percent underwriting profit (11.5
percent including the elimination of the supplemental reserve), compared to
10.7 percent in 1993. We reduced underwriting expenses by 3.0 percentage
points, after a reduction of 3.5 percentage points in 1993.
23
19
Progressive's Core Business
-------------------------------
Ninety-five percent of Progressive's net premiums written come from 13 Core
divisions, which write insurance for private passenger autos and small
commercial and recreational vehicles. Core business net premiums written grew
38 percent to $2,341 million, compared to $1,700 million in 1993. The
underwriting profit margin was 7 percent, compared to 10 percent in 1993.
Progressive's new auto insurance and management strategies make us optimistic
about meeting ambitious profit and growth objectives.
In 1994, we consolidated our new customer services into an emerging Progressive
brand by expanding service in a number of states and testing ways to project
the brand to potential customers. We also assimilated new approaches to
managing into a process where more people are empowered, better focused and
constantly improving the delivery of around-the-clock, immediate response,
information-rich service, designed to delight customers.
The principal elements of Progressive's brand were first offered in Miami,
Florida, in 1991. We have continuously improved that initial offering, which is
now being sold throughout Florida, in Texas and in Ohio, and will be expanded
to more states in 1995.
We use a combination of television commercials, direct mail and other media to
urge consumers to try our unique, free Express Quote(SM) service by calling 1
800 AUTO PRO.(R) Callers spend about 15 minutes with our insurance counselors to
obtain accurate auto insurance premium prices for their specific situation from
State Farm, Allstate, Progressive and the third or fourth largest auto insurer
in their state and to learn about the following Progressive auto insurance
improvements:
ASSISTANCE AFTER AN ACCIDENT, OR OTHER LOSS, is Progressive's most important
service, so we implore our customers to call 1-800-274-4499 immediately after
any incident. 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, a Progressive person answers the
phone, takes the information, authorizes emergency measures and almost always
can have a Progressive claim rep face-to-face with the customer or claimant
within a few hours.
CONSUMERS ABHOR BEING REJECTED, so Progressive offers a price to every licensed
driver. As we became more comfortable with the test rates for the 80+ percent
of the market we are serving for the first time, we allowed their volume to
grow to between five
24
20
and ten percent of total 1994 volume.
CONSUMERS PREFER DIFFERENT WAYS TO BUY, so we offer choices--with an
independent agent, over the telephone, at a Progressive location or by mail.
Many independent agents, who were threatened by multi-distribution and lower
commissions, realize that by concentrating on explaining the consumers' choices
at the point-of-sale, they can make good money on Progressive's new low-cost
auto insurance, while regaining lost private passenger auto market share. Other
agents use our commission options to match the different levels of service
provided to different insureds. Independent agents accounted for over 90
percent of 1994 volume.
CONSUMERS WANT TO DO BUSINESS WHEN IT'S CONVENIENT FOR THEM, so we are
available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, to deliver any service and/or answer
any question.
Progressive's unique approach to management continues to evolve along with its
business strategy. In 1994, we were pleased to be recognized by management
scholars and writers, as well as by USA Today and Fortune, for the success of
our "management re-engineering," which includes the following:
TOTAL QUALITY MANAGEMENT dovetails with our Excellence Core Value--doing better
than we did before--and empowers Progressive people to change how they function
if the change measurably improves customer service or reduces costs, and if it
does not disrupt others in the work chain.  Because measurement is essential to
TQM, we have dramatically improved our ability to measure performance and to
control quality.
TEAMWORK has replaced intense internal competition as the way we work. We
continue to improve the ways in which we motivate, manage and reward teams.
STEADY COST REDUCTION has been, and continues to be, critical to our strategy,
and, along with profit and growth, is the basis for our people's Gainsharing
awards. Underwriting expenses were 24 percent of premiums in 1994, compared to
26 percent in 1993 and 31 percent in 1989.
PROCESS MANAGEMENT has been added to senior line managers' profit and loss
responsibilities, eliminating much staff-line friction and fostering
cooperation among divisions and departments.
THOROUGH TESTING of new ideas has replaced our former propensity to seize
perceived opportunities and grow them as fast as possible.
PERFORMANCE-BASED COMPENSATION pays our people very well for exceptional
performance, makes contingent pay significant to everyone and fosters the
achievement of our demanding objectives.
25
21
Adapt to the
changes
in the industry
caused by
competition,
risk,
investments, and
government
rules and
regulations.
Being prepared
in advance,
to accept
changes and
being able to adapt,
makes you
the leader and
not a follower.
Progressive's Diversified Businesses
----------------------------------------
Diversified divisions provide combinations of service and indemnity to
businesses. In 1994, Diversified divisions' net premiums written and
underwriting profits were $115 million and 21 percent, respectively, compared
to $118 million and 14 percent in 1993. The Diversified divisions produced
service revenue and pretax profits of $41.9 million and $10.0 million,
respectively, in 1994, compared to $43.7 million and $6.8 million in 1993.
26
[ARTWORK]
27
[ARTWORK]
28
24
Investments and Capital Management
--------------------------------------
The balance of revenue and profit comes from interest, dividends and capital
gains produced by Progressive's assets. Progressive's investment and capital
management are managed by our subsidiary, Progressive Partners, Inc., based in
Rye, New York.
Progressive Partners employs conservative investment and capital management
philosophies, intended to preserve our focus on underwriting and to ensure that
we have enough capital to support all the insurance premium we can write
profitably. We believe that insurance companies create shareholder value by
taking risks to improve their offering to consumers, not by generating cash to
be invested aggressively. During 1994, we were neither harmed nor distracted by
the speculative investment strategies that impaired many enterprises.
The Company's investment portfolio increased to $3,180.0 million at December
31, 1994, from $2,786.4 million at December 31, 1993. For 1994, total
investment income (interest, dividends and realized capital gains) was $182.3
million before taxes and $146.7 million after taxes, compared to $242.4 million
before taxes and $177.2 million after taxes in 1993. In 1994, we realized $23.8
million in capital gains, compared to $107.9 million in 1993. The large
difference was principally attributable to the $74.3 million gain recorded on
the sale of  our investment in MBNA in 1993. On December 31, 1994, our
portfolio had $41.1 million in unrealized losses, compared to $70.2 million in
unrealized gains in 1993. This decrease was due largely to the adverse impact
on our fixed-income portfolio of rapidly rising interest rates throughout 1994.
Progressive seeks incremental returns through active management of its assets
and measures performance on a total return basis. In 1994, the taxable
equivalent total return was 3.7 percent. This was 4.3 percentage points, or
$134 million, better than the benchmark against which we measure performance.
The most important factors accounting for this improvement were maintaining
relatively short average bond maturities and investing heavily in intermediate
municipal bonds that outperformed other fixed income categories. The quality of
the portfolio remained exceptional with high-grade fixed-income instruments
averaging about 92 percent of invested assets throughout the year.
In January 1994, near the lows in interest rates for the year, we issued $200
million of 6.60 percent, 10-year notes. We expect this transaction, and the
$327 million of debt and equity financing completed in 1993, will preclude the
need to raise additional capital for the foreseeable future.
During 1994, we repurchased 1,080,300 Progressive Common Shares at an average
cost of $31.44 per share.
29
25
The
diversity of
humanity
will always be
reflective of
truth, freedom,
peace, love
and justice.
As we evolve to
embrace
our diversity,
we learn
to express these
attributes
of humanity.
1994 Initiatives
--------------------
Progressive's total concentration on auto insurance means that every initiative
is designed to improve customer product, price and service.
DIVERSITY Our growth plans suggest that most new hires will be either claim or
customer service representatives. Our objective is to have the demographics of
the people we hire for these positions reflect the demographics of the
communities where our offices are located, and ultimately the demographics of
our customers.
TV COMMERCIALS We produced new commercials highlighting Express Quote(SM)
service, building on the theme of changing auto insurance consumers'
expectations.
COMMUNITY ORGANIZATION We began experimenting with moving profit and growth
responsibility for high potential communities from state-focused division
presidents to community managers to put us closer to customers and to manage
hyper-growth better.
NEW HEADQUARTERS After years of having our Cleveland people in many different
buildings along the I-271 corridor east of Cleveland, we completed and moved
into 517,800 square feet of new space on our Wilson Mills Road, 42-acre site,
where Information Services occupies the building that was our headquarters from
1974 through 1986, improving internal communication and reducing costs.
30
26
Risks
---------
Progressive faces tremendous opportunity. We point out risks to help our
shareholders understand the Company better, not because our risk level is
greater than that of other businesses.
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY RISK Insurance laws and regulations change
continually. In 1994, the political climate may have improved. Consumers,
enjoying a respite from inflationary price increases, have moderated their
demands for reform. We rely on our division presidents and product managers to
help regulators and legislators resolve issues in the way that best serves
consumers.
UNPREDICTABLE UNDERWRITING MARGIN AND GROWTH RATE Our strategy is to strive to
achieve a four percent underwriting profit margin target in each program. We
cannot predict with precision the timing and pace of the decrease in
underwriting margins, nor the rate of growth. With margins now closer to four
percent, we monitor each program to ensure that rates are adjusted promptly and
adequately.
UNPREDICTABLE INVESTMENT INCOME The average duration of our $2.9 billion
fixed-income portfolio is approximately 2.5 years, meaning investment income is
unusually sensitive to short-term interest rates. We continue to maintain a
short average maturity to support our operating strategy, but have recently
lengthened the portfolio somewhat.
PRICING RISK We continue to learn how to price standard and preferred auto
insurance, but have not yet conclusively proved our expertise. We minimize this
risk by controlling volume in these new programs and changing rates immediately
when experience dictates.
HOMEOWNERS INSURANCE This type of insurance would be risky if our auto
insurance market share objectives require we offer it. The current situation of
having no plans to write homeowners may also present a risk because many
consumers prefer to buy all their insurance from one company. In 1995, we will
assess demand for homeowners and develop a plan to satisfy our customers'
needs.
GROWTH ITSELF Our 30 percent growth and excellent return on equity over the
past two years are because our customers value Progressive's service. Our $638
million growth in 1994 was more than our total net premiums written in 1985.
Although we have experience managing hyper-growth, we have never hired and
trained so many people so fast. We measure quality in all operations and will
slow growth if quality slips.
ADVERTISED BRAND Consumer advertising and brand awareness require higher
performance standards. In 1994, we increased our appreciation of the ability
of consumers to make wise choices, which in turn increased our urgency to
respond to their demand for improved service at lower cost.
COMPETITOR RESPONSE Other insurers will react to Progressive's attempt to
change consumers' auto insurance experience, but we cannot predict when and how
their response will affect our growth and profitability. We monitor competitors
and will promptly incorporate their product and service improvements in our
consumer offering.
31
27
Diverse skills
and ideas
create tension.
Tension
catalyzes personal
and
organizational
growth.
Successful, evolving
organizations
embrace rather
than
avoid tension.
The Future
--------------
Progressive is leading a wave of change in the United States' system for
dealing with auto accident injuries and property damage. We are reducing auto
accident victims' trauma and costs, improving how consumers feel about auto
insurance and being rewarded for our leadership.  Success so far encourages us
to expand at a pace that tests our ability to provide the service we aspire to
deliver.
We begin 1995 as we began all other years--excited, respectful of the challenge
implicit in our objectives and strategy, humbled by our failures, proud of
having responded to them and confident that our excellent people will continue
to achieve superior results.
Much will be required to realize our vision. At Progressive, it is always as
if we are just beginning our business and so we look at a future that is
brighter than ever.
We deeply appreciate the customers we are privileged to serve. Thank you for
your business, and thanks especially to the more than 30,000 independent
insurance agents who chose to do business with Progressive in 1994. We are
particularly grateful for our shareholders' continued confidence. To the men
and women who make Progressive a great company, thanks for all your
contributions in 1994 and the promise you bring to our future.
/s/ Joy Love and Peace
Peter Lewis
Peter B. Lewis, Chairman, President
and Chief Executive Officer