-----------------------------------
For 34 years, writing annually to shareholders has been my way to describe
Progressive's achievements and aspirations, and to explain our current
performance and prospects. I try to do it in a way that lets anyone interested
in Progressive understand the value of and reasons for what Progressive does.
Since 1965, Progressive has grown faster and more profitably than other auto
insurers. By 1988, we were the largest, fastest-growing, most-profitable insurer
specializing in high-risk auto insurance sold by Independent Insurance Agents.
This was achieved by Progressive's smart and creative people working hard to
serve auto insurance consumers better than competitors. In 1988, California
consumer activists turned their constituents' rage against escalating auto
insurance costs into laws and regulations that threatened auto insurance as a
free-enterprise activity. Progressive's strategic response has been to create a
new value proposition with redefined service, distribution and product that
enhances consumers' auto insurance experience.
Today, we offer auto insurance to every licensed driver, selling many ways while
innovating in claims, technology, pricing and consumer brand building. We first
changed claim service so we could respond to most claims within a few hours of
their being reported, any time, any day. Next, we made all services available 24
hours a day, 7 days a week and developed rates for all licensed owners and
drivers. Then we distributed in the many different ways consumers wanted to
buy-in person from Independent Agents, by telephone through 1 800 AUTO PRO(R)
or online at progressive.com. Another innovation was offering competitor premium
comparisons. We use a combination of television, direct mail and other media to
urge consumers to consider Progressive's unique combination of price and
service. As important as Independent Agents continue to be to Progressive, we no
longer depend solely on them choosing us for their nonstandard risks.
Progressive seeks to be consumers' #1 choice for auto insurance.
Progressive's Personal Lines net premiums written of $4.9 billion (93% of
Progressive's total net premiums written) were 4.0% of the industry's U.S.
personal lines insurance premiums, making Progressive the 5th largest U.S. auto
insurer. We had another year of excellent financial performance in 1998,
notwithstanding the aggressive competition in auto insurance history.
Progressive's underwriting profit margin was 8.4% (industry was .3%), compared
to 6.6% in 1997.
Although proud of our achievements, all Progressive people understand that
our customers, agents, partners and shareholders care only about what we WILL do
for them-no matter what we have already done for them. Competitors are imitating
Progressive's consumer-focused innovations. Industry-wide auto insurance service
is generally better. Auto insurance premiums are stable or declining due to
continuing trends with respect to safer cars and roads, the impaired driving
crackdown, better law enforcement and insurers operating more efficiently.
1
5
16
ART HERE
Because auto insurance rates are based on history, and because experience
steadily improves, we are in the midst of the most profitable period in 20
years. There is an explosion in consumer advertising for auto insurance. Many
insurers are increasing producer incentives and many more are reducing rates.
Soon operating margins may shrink and be negative for the industry as a whole.
These circumstances historically have energized Progressive's great people to
focus their knowledge, creativity and effort to serve our customers even better
and more efficiently, to achieve our profit and growth aspirations.
To become consumers' #1 choice for auto insurance, Progressive seeks to provide
a competitive price for all drivers AND to produce at least a 4% underwriting
profit over the total time a person is insured by Progressive. We seek customers
for life and are more focused on retaining customers longer. To do this, and to
attract new customers, we will promote our brand based on Progressive's unique
customer proposition. We "kicked off" 1999 brand building by sponsoring the
Super Bowl(TM) XXXIII Halftime Show and by introducing new commercials featuring
E.T. as spokesterrestrial for Progressive's commitment to reduce the trauma and
costs of accidents by reducing their frequency and severity.
Customer focus has driven Progressive's innovation over the past decade. We
will work hard in 1999 to expand and improve the ways in which consumers become
Progressive customers and will foreclose no distribution option. We know that
costs must continue to come down for us to accomplish our vision and achieve our
financial objectives. We continue to improve claim operations, trying to reduce
claim costs faster than competitors. We continue to work hard to eliminate work
and simplify processes, obtain economies of
1
6
17
ART HERE
scale, and reduce cycle times and costs, thereby improving customer satisfaction
and lowering customer cost. We regularly measure more activities more precisely
to understand them better and to improve performance.
We refine the definition and delivery of Immediate Response(R) claims
service as we gain greater understanding of customer/claimant needs.
Progressive's Immediate Response Vehicles (painted white with PROGRESSIVE
emblazoned in blue on the side) travel America's streets providing the help and
counseling people need when they are unfortunate enough to have an auto mishap
and reinforcing the defining service standard only available from us.
1
7
18
ART HERE
1
8
19
ART HERE
1
9
20
ART HERE
2
0
21
-----------------------
OUR ORGANIZATION
-----------------------
More customers and changing business processes require the talent and energy of
people who are better trained, harder working and better paid. How we train,
motivate, evaluate and compensate our people and how we organize are critical to
Progressive's success. Auto insurance differs greatly by community because
regulations differ by state and because traffic, law enforcement, cultural
attitudes, insurance agents, medical services and auto repair facilities differ
by community. Our matrix organization enables Progressive to meet varied local
conditions under a cohesive set of policies that ensure consistency and control,
while sustaining experimentation and excitement.
Progressive's 44 State and Community Managers actually run the business in
their state(s). State Managers are measured and paid based on profit and growth
in their state(s) or region. They manage claims, distribution, advertising
budgets, price levels, agent development, regulation and community relations for
their state. State Managers decide their state(s) organization, including
appointing Community Managers with responsibilities similar to their own for a
large part of the state.
State Managers report to members of the "Policy Team" which in 1999 includes
two CEOs (Insurance Operations, Investments and Capital Management), four
Distribution Leaders (Independent Agent, 1 800 AUTO PRO(R), progressive.com,
Strategic Alliances), Chief Pricing/Product Officer, Chief Claim Officer, Chief
Financial Officer, Chief Information Officer, Chief Human Resources Officer and
Chief Communications Officer. The Distribution Leaders are challenged to develop
and manage product offerings and customer service processes tailored to the
unique requirements of customers who discover and select Progressive through
different distribution modes.
Progressive's organization is like a growing cell inhabited by nearly 16,000
people, many soaring from team to team and task to task. The sphere's skin is
kept taut by straight lines between people which define the relationship of the
people connected by them (e.g. boss, former boss, direct report, former direct
report, relative, etc.). These relationships change constantly, responding to
business and personal needs. We eliminate organization confusion by being clear
and current about performance objectives, standards, measurements and rewards
for each team and each person. We help our people understand how their good work
enhances our customers' well-being, our shareholders' value, our agents'
prosperity, our partners' profits and their personal opportunities.
Objectives are regularly reviewed and renegotiated. Performance against
objectives is regularly and completely reported on and monitored. The whole
process is validated and reinforced by Progressive's performance-based employee
incentive compensation program, which paid $85.8 million for 1997 and $107.5
million for 1998. Progressive stays flexible by having people expect the
organization, their objectives and the Gainsharing formula to change regularly.
2
1
22
---------------------------------
PERSONAL LINES BUSINESS
---------------------------------
Ninety-three percent of Progressive's net premiums written is insurance for
private passenger automobiles, motorcycles and recreational vehicles. Net
premiums written for the Personal Lines business was $4,922.3 million, 15% more
than the $4,288.8 million in 1997. The underwriting profit margin was 7.9%,
compared to 6.3% in 1997. In 1998, we celebrated a milestone in our motorcycle
product expansion by taking over market share leadership from State Farm.
PRODUCT STRATEGY-COMPETITIVE RATES FOR ALL RISK PROFILES In 1997, we reported
that introducing financial responsibility as an auto insurance rating factor
would result in more competitive rates for many consumers. In 1998, we used
financial responsibility in 43 states and began to refine and improve our
product design. We expect product design and pricing methods to evolve
constantly, based on our developing understanding of loss data, work flows,
market conditions and technology, as well as consumer acceptance of our brand as
an insurer for all drivers. We introduced the next generation of product design
in mid-1998 and expect to have it in markets representing 80% of premium by
April 1999. Early results suggest we are attracting more drivers from all risk
profiles and retaining them longer.
BRAND STRATEGY - BE PROGRESSIVE In 1998, we expanded Progressive's brand
promotion and the service and price proposition it stands for by introducing
our television advertising in 43 additional markets, bringing the total number
of markets in which we regularly advertise to 83. We expanded our national
fleet of distinctively marked Immediate Response Vehicles, increased our
visibility in the Independent Agency channel with prominent Progressive
Authorized Independent Agent signs and significantly increased advertising
related to our Internet site, all aimed at substantially increasing awareness
of Progressive, what we offer, and what it means to BE PROGRESSIVE.
Customers evaluate our brand by the experiences we provide them. We measure
customer satisfaction and our performance with a combination of surveys,
customer response requests, phone monitoring and mystery shopping. Delivering
superior service depends on hiring superb people and training them all very
well. During 1998, we successfully hired and trained over 3,800 people
companywide, including claim representatives, policy service representatives,
sales representatives, and technology and management staff, and provided ongoing
training to several thousand employees across each service experience. We employ
a variety of techniques including aptitude simulations before hiring, coaching/
mentoring programs, team quality and productivity objectives, and
performance-based promotion to develop and empower exceptional people and
deliver consistently good customer experiences.
MARKETING STRATEGY-MANY WAYS TO BUY To accommodate consumer preferences, we
offer our products through more than 30,000 Independent Insurance Agents, by
calling 1 800 AUTO PRO(R) or by visiting our Web site, progressive.com. We are
the market leader in selling auto insurance through Independent Agents and seek
ever stronger ties between us and Independent Agents and their customers. In
1998, there was considerable development in agent systems to greatly improve
Agents' ability to quote accurately, to retrieve policyholder information, to
receive rate and software updates electronically, to eliminate paper and to use
the Internet to communicate with us.
2
2
23
Our fastest growing distribution channel is 1 800 AUTO PRO(R), making
Progressive a leading direct writer of auto insurance. To support growth, we
expanded to five call center locations in 1998 and focused on sales
effectiveness training, measurement and call center management. Progressive is
the market leader in selling auto insurance on the Internet. Consumers can
comparison shop online for auto insurance in 47 states and can actually buy
online in 23 states plus the District of Columbia. In 1998, we introduced
"Personal Progressive," an online Internet-based system providing consumers
access to their own policy information and allowing them to process certain
changes and premium payments.
In 1998, our Strategic Alliances channel surpassed 200 active alliances with
companies that influence their constituents to buy Progressive's products. Our
expanded and improved product and offering rates for all drivers greatly expand
the opportunities for direct and affinity marketing programs aimed at all risks
to be sold through these long-term, exclusive alliances.
Midland Financial Group, acquired in 1997, underwrites and markets
nonstandard private passenger auto insurance, under the Midland name, through
Independent Agents in 11 southeastern and western states.
In 1999, because different distribution channels and the customer sets they
attract present different business opportunities and challenges, each channel
will be led by a Policy Team member. We seek to maximize the opportunities
within each distribution channel, while maintaining both the integrity of brand
experience for all customers and the ability to leverage our service and
technology infrastructures. However our customers decide to buy, we want them to
understand and benefit from the following Progressive service offerings.
SERVICE STRATEGY-WHEN AND WHERE YOU WANT IT Assistance after an accident or
other loss is Progressive's most important service. We implore our customers to
call 1-800-274-4499 immediately after any incident. Twenty-four hours a day, 7
days a week, Progressive people take claim report telephone calls, obtain the
relevant information, authorize emergency measures and dispatch Progressive
claim representatives to meet customers as quickly as possible, usually within
hours.
AROUND-THE-CLOCK SERVICE. Consumers want to do business when it's convenient for
them, so we operate 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, providing insurance sales and
policy change assistance, as well as the critically important Immediate
Response(R) claims service. Our customers come to depend on this level of
service, which we support by continuous real-time monitoring of internal systems
performance, threatening weather and other natural disasters. This approach
allows us immediately to reconfigure voice and data networks and to activate
disaster response teams when required.
2
3
24
ART HERE
2
4
25
ART HERE
2
5
26
ART HERE
2
6
27
------------------------
OTHER BUSINESSES
------------------------
The Company's other lines of business include writing insurance for small fleets
of commercial vehicles, collateral protection and loan tracking for auto lenders
and financial institutions, directors' and officers' liability and fidelity
coverage for American Bankers Association member community banks and independent
credit unions, and providing related claims, underwriting and system services.
Revenues in these businesses were $405 million in 1998, compared to $402 million
last year. Pretax operating profit was $62 million, compared to $37 million last
year, up 68%, and return on revenue was 15.3%, compared to 9.2% in 1997. Most of
these businesses are in markets that are declining in size.
---------------------------------------
INVESTMENTS AND CAPITAL MANAGEMENT
---------------------------------------
Progressive employs a conservative approach to investments and capital
management, intended to ensure that there is sufficient capital to support all
the insurance premium that we can profitably write. Our objectives are to
finance growth internally, to sustain an A or better senior debt rating, to have
lower debt cost than peer companies and to repurchase stock cost-effectively.
Progressive's senior debt was rated A+ and A2 by S&P and Moody's, respectively,
at year-end 1998 and our debt to debt plus capital ratio was 23.3%. During 1998,
we repurchased 393,000 shares at an average cost per share of $104. We filed a
shelf registration to issue $300 million of senior debt intended to replace $300
million of debt expiring at year-end 2000.
Asset allocation considers the capital we have in excess of that required to
support premiums planned over the next three years, anticipated liquidity needs
and our analysis of the expected risks and returns on various assets. At
year-end 1998, $4,532.9 million, 79.9% of our total invested assets, was
investment-grade, fixed-maturity securities, compared to $4,168.3 million in
1997, 79.1%. Non-investment-grade fixed-maturity securities were $128.0 million,
2.3% of total invested assets, compared to $132.5 million in 1997, 2.5%. The
portfolio's duration was 2.8 years at year-end 1998, in the middle of our target
range.
Common stocks were $636.9 million, 11.2% of total invested assets, compared
to $620.8 million and 11.8% at year-end 1997. Our 3.7% total return
underperformed the S&P 500's 28.5% because we overweighted smaller
capitalization "value style" companies and foreign equities.
Included in our non-investment-grade fixed-maturity securities and our common
stock portfolio are $299.6 million, 5.3%, of other risk assets. Other risk
assets include such items as high yield and distressed debt, private equities
and warrants, and mezzanine investments. No individual security in the other
risk asset portfolio comprised more than one percent of Progressive's total
investment portfolio. Our total return on the average amount invested in this
asset class in 1998 was (4.4)%.
In 1998, Progressive earned $221.3 million of investment income after tax,
compared to $205.3 million in 1997. Realized gains were $11.4 million in 1998,
compared to $98.5 million in 1997. As of year-end 1998, there were $174.3
million in unrealized gains, compared to $188.4 million at year-end 1997. The
weighted average fully taxable equivalent book yield of the portfolio was 6.3%
in 1998, compared to 6.6% in 1997.
2
7
28
---------------
RISKS
---------------
LEGISLATIVE AND REGULATORY Highly complex regulation becomes more ambiguous in a
technology-driven economy and compliance with the variety of state regulatory
systems becomes more difficult. As Progressive innovates and grows, our
"cutting-edge" programs increase the risk of regulatory scrutiny. The constant
attention of the plaintiff bar to the insurance industry increases the risk of
added liabilities not contemplated when premiums were set.
ADVERTISED BRAND Heightened consumer awareness of the Progressive brand requires
ever higher performance standards. We regularly monitor consumer reaction to our
advertising and assess their service delivery expectations. We continually seek
ways to exceed consumer expectations in innovative and low-cost ways.
UNPREDICTABLE UNDERWRITING MARGIN AND GROWTH RATE Our goal is to achieve a 4%
underwriting profit over the entire retention period of a policyholder and we
monitor closely to ensure rates are adjusted promptly and adequately. However,
we cannot predict with precision the timing and pace of changes in underwriting
margins, retention or the rate of growth.
HOMEOWNERS INSURANCE Because many consumers buy auto and homeowners insurance
together, we plan to test offer a homeowners product in 1999, expanding
thereafter based on what we learn from the tests. Inexperience exposes us to
underwriting losses. Broad implementation could create underserved market issues
and aggregate exposures requiring precise measurement and conservative
management.
COMPETITOR RESPONSE Competitors notice Progressive's profitability and growth
and then attempt to copy our approach to improving auto insurance consumers'
experience. We cannot predict whether or when competitive tactics will influence
our profitability and growth, and/or if their attempts to attract our excellent
people will succeed. We constantly monitor competitors and improve our products
and services to keep them among the industry's best.
Y2K Between 1995 and 1998, nearly 100% of our system applications were
remediated. Critical applications are being tested in our Year 2000 Time Warp
Lab, an autonomous production environment simulating year 2000 operating time
frames. We are well under way in ensuring that mainframe computers, servers,
personal computers, operating systems, desktop applications and
telecommunications hardware and software are compliant. We have completed
contingency plans for all of our business processes and are assessing and
testing key business partners' readiness. During 1999, we will continue to test,
refine and challenge all our preparations. Nonetheless, Progressive, like other
well-prepared institutions, is subject to Y2K risks we cannot anticipate,
eliminate or quantify.
2
8
29
ART HERE
2
9
30
----------------------
THE FUTURE
----------------------
In 1998, I turned 65 and recovered from an illness. It became clear that
managing a smooth CEO succession that left people confident about Progressive's
future would be the best thing I could do for the organization I am so proud of
and care so much about. On January 1, 1999, Progressive's CEO responsibility was
divided so that we now have a CEO-Insurance Operations and a CEO-Investments and
Capital Management. Chuck Chokel, formerly CFO, became CEO-Investments and
Capital Management and I remain CEO-Insurance Operations. In 1998, we also
codified the Board structure, composition and protocols that resulted in
clarifying the role of Chairman of the Board, as distinct from the CEO. I remain
Chairman of the Board. There are no plans now to appoint a new CEO-Insurance
Operations. However, I am delighted to have a structure in place that allows it
and will permit me to contribute.
Progressive leads a wave of change in the United States' system for dealing
with auto accident injuries and property damage. We reduce auto accident
victims' trauma and cost. We are being rewarded for leadership and commitment.
Our success so far encourages us to expand at a pace that tests our ability to
provide the service we aspire to deliver.
We begin 1999 as we have begun all other years-excited, respectful of the
challenges implicit in our objectives and strategy, humbled by our failures,
proud of having responded to them and comfortable that our excellent people will
continue to achieve superior results. Much will be required to realize our
vision. At Progressive, it is always as if we are just beginning our business.
We see a future that is brighter than ever.
We deeply appreciate the customers we are privileged to serve. Thank you for
your business. Thanks to the more than 30,000 Independent Insurance Agents who
did business with Progressive in 1998. We are grateful for our shareholders'
continued confidence. To the 15,735 men and women who make Progressive a great
company, thanks for all your contributions in 1998 and for the promise you bring
to our future.
Joy, Love and Peace
/s/ Peter Lewis
Peter B. Lewis
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer-
Insurance Operations
3
0
31
ART HERE
3
1
32
ART HERE
3
2
33
------------------------------------